
Chapter I.
Myfather's family name being Pirrip, and my Christian name Philip, my infanttongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than Pip. So, Icalled myself Pip, and came to be called Pip.
I give Pirrip as my father's family name, on the authority of his tombstone andmy sister,—Mrs. Joe Gargery, who married the blacksmith. As I never saw myfather or my mother, and never saw any likeness of either of them (for theirdays were long before the days of photographs), my first fancies regarding whatthey were like were unreasonably derived from their tombstones. The shape ofthe letters on my father's, gave me an odd idea that he was a square, stout,dark man, with curly black hair. From the character and turn of theinscription, "Also Georgiana Wife of the Above," I drew a childishconclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly. To five little stonelozenges, each about a foot and a half long, which were arranged in a neat rowbeside their grave, and were sacred to the memory of five little brothers ofmine,—who gave up trying to get a living, exceedingly early in that universalstruggle,—I am indebted for a belief I religiously entertained that they hadall been born on their backs with their hands in their trousers-pockets, andhad never taken them out in this state of existence.
Ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as the river wound,twenty miles of the sea. My first most vivid and broad impression of theidentity of things seems to me to have been gained on a memorable raw afternoontowards evening. At such a time I found out for certain that this bleak placeovergrown with nettles was the churchyard; and that Philip Pirrip, late of thisparish, and also Georgiana wife of the above, were dead and buried; and thatAlexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and Roger, infant children of theaforesaid, were also dead and buried; and that the dark flat wilderness beyondthe churchyard, intersected with dikes and mounds and gates, with scatteredcattle feeding on it, was the marshes; and that the low leaden line beyond wasthe river; and that the distant savage lair from which the wind was rushing wasthe sea; and that the small bundle of shivers growing afraid of it all andbeginning to cry, was Pip.
"Hold your noise!" cried a terrible voice, as a man started up from among thegraves at the side of the church porch. "Keep still, you little devil, or I'llcut your throat!"
A fearful man, all in coarse grey, with a great iron on his leg. A man with nohat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tied round his head. A man whohad been soaked in water, and smothered in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut byflints, and stung by nettles, and torn by briars; who limped, and shivered, andglared, and growled; and whose teeth chattered in his head as he seized me bythe chin.
"Oh! Don't cut my throat, sir," I pleaded in terror. "Pray don't do it, sir."
"Tell us your name!" said the man. "Quick!"
"Pip, sir."
"Once more," said the man, staring at me. "Give it mouth!"
"Pip. Pip, sir."
"Show us where you live," said the man. "Pint out the place!"
I pointed to where our village lay, on the flat in-shore among the alder-treesand pollards, a mile or more from the church.
The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down, and emptiedmy pockets. There was nothing in them but a piece of bread. When the churchcame to itself,—for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go head overheels before me, and I saw the steeple under my feet,—when the church came toitself, I say, I was seated on a high tombstone, trembling while he ate thebread ravenously.




"You young dog," said the man, licking his lips, "what fat cheeks you ha' got."
I believe they were fat, though I was at that time undersized for my years, andnot strong.
"Darn me if I couldn't eat 'em," said the man, with a threatening shake of hishead, "and if I han't half a mind to't!"
I earnestly expressed my hope that he wouldn't, and held tighter to thetombstone on which he had put me; partly, to keep myself upon it; partly, tokeep myself from crying.
"Now lookee here!" said the man. "Where's your mother?"
"There, sir!" said I.
He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over his shoulder.
"There, sir!" I timidly explained. "Also Georgiana. That's my mother."
"Oh!" said he, coming back. "And is that your father alonger your mother?"
"Yes, sir," said I; "him too; late of this parish."
"Ha!" he muttered then, considering. "Who d'ye live with,—supposin' you'rekindly let to live, which I han't made up my mind about?"
"My sister, sir,—Mrs. Joe Gargery,—wife of Joe Gargery, the blacksmith, sir."
"Blacksmith, eh?" said he. And looked down at his leg.
After darkly looking at his leg and me several times, he came closer to mytombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted me back as far as he could hold me;so that his eyes looked most powerfully down into mine, and mine looked mosthelplessly up into his.
"Now lookee here," he said, "the question being whether you're to be let tolive. You know what a file is?"
"Yes, sir."
"And you know what wittles is?"
"Yes, sir."
After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to give me a greatersense of helplessness and danger.
"You get me a file." He tilted me again. "And you get me wittles." He tilted meagain. "You bring 'em both to me." He tilted me again. "Or I'll have your heartand liver out." He tilted me again.
I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to him with both hands,and said, "If you would kindly please to let me keep upright, sir, perhaps Ishouldn't be sick, and perhaps I could attend more."
He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the church jumped over itsown weathercock. Then, he held me by the arms, in an upright position on thetop of the stone, and went on in these fearful terms:—
"You bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file and them wittles. You bringthe lot to me, at that old Battery over yonder. You do it, and you never dareto say a word or dare to make a sign concerning your having seen such a personas me, or any person sumever, and you shall be let to live. You fail, or you gofrom my words in any partickler, no matter how small it is, and your heart andyour liver shall be tore out, roasted, and ate. Now, I ain't alone, as you maythink I am. There's a young man hid with me, in comparison with which young manI am a Angel. That young man hears the words I speak. That young man has asecret way pecooliar to himself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and athis liver. It is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that youngman. A boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed, may tuck himself up, may drawthe clothes over his head, may think himself comfortable and safe, but thatyoung man will softly creep and creep his way to him and tear him open. I am akeeping that young man from harming of you at the present moment, with greatdifficulty. I find it wery hard to hold that young man off of your inside. Now,what do you say?"
I said that I would get him the file, and I would get him what broken bits offood I could, and I would come to him at the Battery, early in the morning.
"Say Lord strike you dead if you don't!" said the man.
I said so, and he took me down.
"Now," he pursued, "you remember what you've undertook, and you remember thatyoung man, and you get home!"
"Goo-good night, sir," I faltered.
"Much of that!" said he, glancing about him over the cold wet flat. "I wish Iwas a frog. Or a eel!"
At the same time, he hugged his shuddering body in both his arms,—claspinghimself, as if to hold himself together,—and limped towards the low churchwall. As I saw him go, picking his way among the nettles, and among thebrambles that bound the green mounds, he looked in my young eyes as if he wereeluding the hands of the dead people, stretching up cautiously out of theirgraves, to get a twist upon his ankle and pull him in.
When he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a man whose legs werenumbed and stiff, and then turned round to look for me. When I saw him turning,I set my face towards home, and made the best use of my legs. But presently Ilooked over my shoulder, and saw him going on again towards the river, stillhugging himself in both arms, and picking his way with his sore feet among thegreat stones dropped into the marshes here and there, for stepping-places whenthe rains were heavy or the tide was in.
The marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as I stopped to lookafter him; and the river was just another horizontal line, not nearly so broadnor yet so black; and the sky was just a row of long angry red lines and denseblack lines intermixed. On the edge of the river I could faintly make out theonly two black things in all the prospect that seemed to be standing upright;one of these was the beacon by which the sailors steered,—like an unhooped caskupon a pole,—an ugly thing when you were near it; the other, a gibbet, withsome chains hanging to it which had once held a pirate. The man was limping ontowards this latter, as if he were the pirate come to life, and come down, andgoing back to hook himself up again. It gave me a terrible turn when I thoughtso; and as I saw the cattle lifting their heads to gaze after him, I wonderedwhether they thought so too. I looked all round for the horrible young man, andcould see no signs of him. But now I was frightened again, and ran home withoutstopping.
