
Chapter X.
Thefelicitous idea occurred to me a morning or two later when I woke, that thebest step I could take towards making myself uncommon was to get out of Biddyeverything she knew. In pursuance of this luminous conception I mentioned toBiddy when I went to Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt's at night, that I had aparticular reason for wishing to get on in life, and that I should feel verymuch obliged to her if she would impart all her learning to me. Biddy, who wasthe most obliging of girls, immediately said she would, and indeed began tocarry out her promise within five minutes.
The Educational scheme or Course established by Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt may beresolved into the following synopsis. The pupils ate apples and put straws downone another's backs, until Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt collected her energies, andmade an indiscriminate totter at them with a birch-rod. After receiving thecharge with every mark of derision, the pupils formed in line and buzzinglypassed a ragged book from hand to hand. The book had an alphabet in it, somefigures and tables, and a little spelling,—that is to say, it had had once. Assoon as this volume began to circulate, Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt fell into astate of coma, arising either from sleep or a rheumatic paroxysm. The pupilsthen entered among themselves upon a competitive examination on the subject ofBoots, with the view of ascertaining who could tread the hardest upon whosetoes. This mental exercise lasted until Biddy made a rush at them anddistributed three defaced Bibles (shaped as if they had been unskilfully cutoff the chump end of something), more illegibly printed at the best than anycuriosities of literature I have since met with, speckled all over withironmould, and having various specimens of the insect world smashed betweentheir leaves. This part of the Course was usually lightened by several singlecombats between Biddy and refractory students. When the fights were over, Biddygave out the number of a page, and then we all read aloud what we could,—orwhat we couldn't—in a frightful chorus; Biddy leading with a high, shrill,monotonous voice, and none of us having the least notion of, or reverence for,what we were reading about. When this horrible din had lasted a certain time,it mechanically awoke Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt, who staggered at a boyfortuitously, and pulled his ears. This was understood to terminate the Coursefor the evening, and we emerged into the air with shrieks of intellectualvictory. It is fair to remark that there was no prohibition against any pupil'sentertaining himself with a slate or even with the ink (when there was any),but that it was not easy to pursue that branch of study in the winter season,on account of the little general shop in which the classes were holden—andwhich was also Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt's sitting-room and bedchamber—being butfaintly illuminated through the agency of one low-spirited dip-candle and nosnuffers.
It appeared to me that it would take time to become uncommon, under thesecircumstances: nevertheless, I resolved to try it, and that very evening Biddyentered on our special agreement, by imparting some information from her littlecatalogue of Prices, under the head of moist sugar, and lending me, to copy athome, a large old English D which she had imitated from the heading of somenewspaper, and which I supposed, until she told me what it was, to be a designfor a buckle.
Of course there was a public-house in the village, and of course Joe likedsometimes to smoke his pipe there. I had received strict orders from my sisterto call for him at the Three Jolly Bargemen, that evening, on my way fromschool, and bring him home at my peril. To the Three Jolly Bargemen, therefore,I directed my steps.
There was a bar at the Jolly Bargemen, with some alarmingly long chalk scoresin it on the wall at the side of the door, which seemed to me to be never paidoff. They had been there ever since I could remember, and had grown more than Ihad. But there was a quantity of chalk about our country, and perhaps thepeople neglected no opportunity of turning it to account.
It being Saturday night, I found the landlord looking rather grimly at theserecords; but as my business was with Joe and not with him, I merely wished himgood evening, and passed into the common room at the end of the passage, wherethere was a bright large kitchen fire, and where Joe was smoking his pipe incompany with Mr. Wopsle and a stranger. Joe greeted me as usual with "Halloa,Pip, old chap!" and the moment he said that, the stranger turned his head andlooked at me.
He was a secret-looking man whom I had never seen before. His head was all onone side, and one of his eyes was half shut up, as if he were taking aim atsomething with an invisible gun. He had a pipe in his mouth, and he took itout, and, after slowly blowing all his smoke away and looking hard at me allthe time, nodded. So, I nodded, and then he nodded again, and made room on thesettle beside him that I might sit down there.
But as I was used to sit beside Joe whenever I entered that place of resort, Isaid "No, thank you, sir," and fell into the space Joe made for me on theopposite settle. The strange man, after glancing at Joe, and seeing that hisattention was otherwise engaged, nodded to me again when I had taken my seat,and then rubbed his leg—in a very odd way, as it struck me.
"You was saying," said the strange man, turning to Joe, "that you was ablacksmith."
"Yes. I said it, you know," said Joe.
"What'll you drink, Mr.—? You didn't mention your name, by the bye."
Joe mentioned it now, and the strange man called him by it. "What'll you drink,Mr. Gargery? At my expense? To top up with?"
"Well," said Joe, "to tell you the truth, I ain't much in the habit of drinkingat anybody's expense but my own."
"Habit? No," returned the stranger, "but once and away, and on a Saturday nighttoo. Come! Put a name to it, Mr. Gargery."
"I wouldn't wish to be stiff company," said Joe. "Rum."
"Rum," repeated the stranger. "And will the other gentleman originate asentiment."
"Rum," said Mr. Wopsle.
"Three Rums!" cried the stranger, calling to the landlord. "Glasses round!"
"This other gentleman," observed Joe, by way of introducing Mr. Wopsle, "is agentleman that you would like to hear give it out. Our clerk at church."
"Aha!" said the stranger, quickly, and cocking his eye at me. "The lonelychurch, right out on the marshes, with graves round it!"
"That's it," said Joe.
The stranger, with a comfortable kind of grunt over his pipe, put his legs upon the settle that he had to himself. He wore a flapping broad-brimmedtraveller's hat, and under it a handkerchief tied over his head in the mannerof a cap: so that he showed no hair. As he looked at the fire, I thought I sawa cunning expression, followed by a half-laugh, come into his face.
"I am not acquainted with this country, gentlemen, but it seems a solitarycountry towards the river."
"Most marshes is solitary," said Joe.
"No doubt, no doubt. Do you find any gypsies, now, or tramps, or vagrants ofany sort, out there?"
"No," said Joe; "none but a runaway convict now and then. And we don't findthem, easy. Eh, Mr. Wopsle?"
Mr. Wopsle, with a majestic remembrance of old discomfiture, assented; but notwarmly.
"Seems you have been out after such?" asked the stranger.
"Once," returned Joe. "Not that we wanted to take them, you understand; we wentout as lookers on; me, and Mr. Wopsle, and Pip. Didn't us, Pip?"
"Yes, Joe."
The stranger looked at me again,—still cocking his eye, as if he were expresslytaking aim at me with his invisible gun,—and said, "He's a likely young parcelof bones that. What is it you call him?"
"Pip," said Joe.
"Christened Pip?"
"No, not christened Pip."
"Surname Pip?"
"No," said Joe, "it's a kind of family name what he gave himself when a infant,and is called by."
"Son of yours?"
"Well," said Joe, meditatively, not, of course, that it could be in anywisenecessary to consider about it, but because it was the way at the JollyBargemen to seem to consider deeply about everything that was discussed overpipes,—"well—no. No, he ain't."
"Nevvy?" said the strange man.
"Well," said Joe, with the same appearance of profound cogitation, "he isnot—no, not to deceive you, he is not—my nevvy."
"What the Blue Blazes is he?" asked the stranger. Which appeared to me to be aninquiry of unnecessary strength.
Mr. Wopsle struck in upon that; as one who knew all about relationships, havingprofessional occasion to bear in mind what female relations a man might notmarry; and expounded the ties between me and Joe. Having his hand in, Mr.Wopsle finished off with a most terrifically snarling passage from Richard theThird, and seemed to think he had done quite enough to account for it when headded, "—as the poet says."
And here I may remark that when Mr. Wopsle referred to me, he considered it anecessary part of such reference to rumple my hair and poke it into my eyes. Icannot conceive why everybody of his standing who visited at our house shouldalways have put me through the same inflammatory process under similarcircumstances. Yet I do not call to mind that I was ever in my earlier youththe subject of remark in our social family circle, but some large-handed persontook some such ophthalmic steps to patronise me.
All this while, the strange man looked at nobody but me, and looked at me as ifhe were determined to have a shot at me at last, and bring me down. But he saidnothing after offering his Blue Blazes observation, until the glasses of rumand water were brought; and then he made his shot, and a most extraordinaryshot it was.
It was not a verbal remark, but a proceeding in dumb-show, and was pointedlyaddressed to me. He stirred his rum and water pointedly at me, and he tastedhis rum and water pointedly at me. And he stirred it and he tasted it; not witha spoon that was brought to him, but with a file.
He did this so that nobody but I saw the file; and when he had done it he wipedthe file and put it in a breast-pocket. I knew it to be Joe's file, and I knewthat he knew my convict, the moment I saw the instrument. I sat gazing at him,spell-bound. But he now reclined on his settle, taking very little notice ofme, and talking principally about turnips.
There was a delicious sense of cleaning-up and making a quiet pause beforegoing on in life afresh, in our village on Saturday nights, which stimulatedJoe to dare to stay out half an hour longer on Saturdays than at other times.The half-hour and the rum and water running out together, Joe got up to go, andtook me by the hand.
"Stop half a moment, Mr. Gargery," said the strange man. "I think I've got abright new shilling somewhere in my pocket, and if I have, the boy shall haveit."
He looked it out from a handful of small change, folded it in some crumpledpaper, and gave it to me. "Yours!" said he. "Mind! Your own."
I thanked him, staring at him far beyond the bounds of good manners, andholding tight to Joe. He gave Joe good-night, and he gave Mr. Wopsle good-night(who went out with us), and he gave me only a look with his aiming eye,—no, nota look, for he shut it up, but wonders may be done with an eye by hiding it.
On the way home, if I had been in a humour for talking, the talk must have beenall on my side, for Mr. Wopsle parted from us at the door of the JollyBargemen, and Joe went all the way home with his mouth wide open, to rinse therum out with as much air as possible. But I was in a manner stupefied by thisturning up of my old misdeed and old acquaintance, and could think of nothingelse.
My sister was not in a very bad temper when we presented ourselves in thekitchen, and Joe was encouraged by that unusual circumstance to tell her aboutthe bright shilling. "A bad un, I'll be bound," said Mrs. Joe triumphantly, "orhe wouldn't have given it to the boy! Let's look at it."
I took it out of the paper, and it proved to be a good one. "But what's this?"said Mrs. Joe, throwing down the shilling and catching up the paper. "TwoOne-Pound notes?"
Nothing less than two fat sweltering one-pound notes that seemed to have beenon terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle-markets in the county. Joecaught up his hat again, and ran with them to the Jolly Bargemen to restorethem to their owner. While he was gone, I sat down on my usual stool and lookedvacantly at my sister, feeling pretty sure that the man would not be there.
Presently, Joe came back, saying that the man was gone, but that he, Joe, hadleft word at the Three Jolly Bargemen concerning the notes. Then my sistersealed them up in a piece of paper, and put them under some dried rose-leavesin an ornamental teapot on the top of a press in the state parlour. There theyremained, a nightmare to me, many and many a night and day.
I had sadly broken sleep when I got to bed, through thinking of the strange mantaking aim at me with his invisible gun, and of the guiltily coarse and commonthing it was, to be on secret terms of conspiracy with convicts,—a feature inmy low career that I had previously forgotten. I was haunted by the file too. Adread possessed me that when I least expected it, the file would reappear. Icoaxed myself to sleep by thinking of Miss Havisham's, next Wednesday; and inmy sleep I saw the file coming at me out of a door, without seeing who held it,and I screamed myself awake.
