
Chapter XI.
At theappointed time I returned to Miss Havisham's, and my hesitating ring at thegate brought out Estella. She locked it after admitting me, as she had donebefore, and again preceded me into the dark passage where her candle stood. Shetook no notice of me until she had the candle in her hand, when she looked overher shoulder, superciliously saying, "You are to come this way to-day," andtook me to quite another part of the house.
The passage was a long one, and seemed to pervade the whole square basement ofthe Manor House. We traversed but one side of the square, however, and at theend of it she stopped, and put her candle down and opened a door. Here, thedaylight reappeared, and I found myself in a small paved courtyard, theopposite side of which was formed by a detached dwelling-house, that looked asif it had once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinct brewery.There was a clock in the outer wall of this house. Like the clock in MissHavisham's room, and like Miss Havisham's watch, it had stopped at twentyminutes to nine.
We went in at the door, which stood open, and into a gloomy room with a lowceiling, on the ground-floor at the back. There was some company in the room,and Estella said to me as she joined it, "You are to go and stand there boy,till you are wanted." "There", being the window, I crossed to it, and stood"there," in a very uncomfortable state of mind, looking out.
It opened to the ground, and looked into a most miserable corner of theneglected garden, upon a rank ruin of cabbage-stalks, and one box-tree that hadbeen clipped round long ago, like a pudding, and had a new growth at the top ofit, out of shape and of a different colour, as if that part of the pudding hadstuck to the saucepan and got burnt. This was my homely thought, as Icontemplated the box-tree. There had been some light snow, overnight, and itlay nowhere else to my knowledge; but, it had not quite melted from the coldshadow of this bit of garden, and the wind caught it up in little eddies andthrew it at the window, as if it pelted me for coming there.
I divined that my coming had stopped conversation in the room, and that itsother occupants were looking at me. I could see nothing of the room except theshining of the fire in the window-glass, but I stiffened in all my joints withthe consciousness that I was under close inspection.
There were three ladies in the room and one gentleman. Before I had beenstanding at the window five minutes, they somehow conveyed to me that they wereall toadies and humbugs, but that each of them pretended not to know that theothers were toadies and humbugs: because the admission that he or she did knowit, would have made him or her out to be a toady and humbug.
They all had a listless and dreary air of waiting somebody's pleasure, and themost talkative of the ladies had to speak quite rigidly to repress a yawn. Thislady, whose name was Camilla, very much reminded me of my sister, with thedifference that she was older, and (as I found when I caught sight of her) of ablunter cast of features. Indeed, when I knew her better I began to think itwas a Mercy she had any features at all, so very blank and high was the deadwall of her face.
"Poor dear soul!" said this lady, with an abruptness of manner quite mysister's. "Nobody's enemy but his own!"
"It would be much more commendable to be somebody else's enemy," said thegentleman; "far more natural."
"Cousin Raymond," observed another lady, "we are to love our neighbour."
"Sarah Pocket," returned Cousin Raymond, "if a man is not his own neighbour,who is?"
Miss Pocket laughed, and Camilla laughed and said (checking a yawn), "Theidea!" But I thought they seemed to think it rather a good idea too. The otherlady, who had not spoken yet, said gravely and emphatically, "Verytrue!"
"Poor soul!" Camilla presently went on (I knew they had all been looking at mein the mean time), "he is so very strange! Would anyone believe that when Tom'swife died, he actually could not be induced to see the importance of thechildren's having the deepest of trimmings to their mourning? ‘Good Lord!' sayshe, ‘Camilla, what can it signify so long as the poor bereaved little thingsare in black?' So like Matthew! The idea!"
"Good points in him, good points in him," said Cousin Raymond; "Heaven forbid Ishould deny good points in him; but he never had, and he never will have, anysense of the proprieties."
"You know I was obliged," said Camilla,—"I was obliged to be firm. I said, ‘ItWILL NOT DO, for the credit of the family.' I told him that,without deep trimmings, the family was disgraced. I cried about it frombreakfast till dinner. I injured my digestion. And at last he flung out in hisviolent way, and said, with a D, ‘Then do as you like.' Thank Goodness it willalways be a consolation to me to know that I instantly went out in a pouringrain and bought the things."
"He paid for them, did he not?" asked Estella.
"It's not the question, my dear child, who paid for them," returned Camilla."I bought them. And I shall often think of that with peace, when I wakeup in the night."
The ringing of a distant bell, combined with the echoing of some cry or callalong the passage by which I had come, interrupted the conversation and causedEstella to say to me, "Now, boy!" On my turning round, they all looked at mewith the utmost contempt, and, as I went out, I heard Sarah Pocket say, "Well Iam sure! What next!" and Camilla add, with indignation, "Was there ever such afancy! The i-de-a!"
As we were going with our candle along the dark passage, Estella stopped all ofa sudden, and, facing round, said in her taunting manner, with her face quiteclose to mine,—
"Well?"
"Well, miss?" I answered, almost falling over her and checking myself.
She stood looking at me, and, of course, I stood looking at her.
"Am I pretty?"
"Yes; I think you are very pretty."
"Am I insulting?"
"Not so much so as you were last time," said I.
"Not so much so?"
"No."
She fired when she asked the last question, and she slapped my face with suchforce as she had, when I answered it.
"Now?" said she. "You little coarse monster, what do you think of me now?"
"I shall not tell you."
"Because you are going to tell upstairs. Is that it?"
"No," said I, "that's not it."
"Why don't you cry again, you little wretch?"
"Because I'll never cry for you again," said I. Which was, I suppose, as falsea declaration as ever was made; for I was inwardly crying for her then, and Iknow what I know of the pain she cost me afterwards.
We went on our way upstairs after this episode; and, as we were going up, wemet a gentleman groping his way down.
"Whom have we here?" asked the gentleman, stopping and looking at me.
"A boy," said Estella.
He was a burly man of an exceedingly dark complexion, with an exceedingly largehead, and a corresponding large hand. He took my chin in his large hand andturned up my face to have a look at me by the light of the candle. He wasprematurely bald on the top of his head, and had bushy black eyebrows thatwouldn't lie down but stood up bristling. His eyes were set very deep in hishead, and were disagreeably sharp and suspicious. He had a large watch-chain,and strong black dots where his beard and whiskers would have been if he hadlet them. He was nothing to me, and I could have had no foresight then, that heever would be anything to me, but it happened that I had this opportunity ofobserving him well.
"Boy of the neighbourhood? Hey?" said he.
"Yes, sir," said I.
"How do you come here?"
"Miss Havisham sent for me, sir," I explained.
"Well! Behave yourself. I have a pretty large experience of boys, and you're abad set of fellows. Now mind!" said he, biting the side of his great forefingeras he frowned at me, "you behave yourself!"
With those words, he released me—which I was glad of, for his hand smelt ofscented soap—and went his way downstairs. I wondered whether he could be adoctor; but no, I thought; he couldn't be a doctor, or he would have a quieterand more persuasive manner. There was not much time to consider the subject,for we were soon in Miss Havisham's room, where she and everything else werejust as I had left them. Estella left me standing near the door, and I stoodthere until Miss Havisham cast her eyes upon me from the dressing-table.
"So!" she said, without being startled or surprised: "the days have worn away,have they?"
"Yes, ma'am. To-day is—"
"There, there, there!" with the impatient movement of her fingers. "I don'twant to know. Are you ready to play?"
I was obliged to answer in some confusion, "I don't think I am, ma'am."
"Not at cards again?" she demanded, with a searching look.
"Yes, ma'am; I could do that, if I was wanted."
"Since this house strikes you old and grave, boy," said Miss Havisham,impatiently, "and you are unwilling to play, are you willing to work?"
I could answer this inquiry with a better heart than I had been able to findfor the other question, and I said I was quite willing.
"Then go into that opposite room," said she, pointing at the door behind mewith her withered hand, "and wait there till I come."
I crossed the staircase landing, and entered the room she indicated. From thatroom, too, the daylight was completely excluded, and it had an airless smellthat was oppressive. A fire had been lately kindled in the damp old-fashionedgrate, and it was more disposed to go out than to burn up, and the reluctantsmoke which hung in the room seemed colder than the clearer air,—like our ownmarsh mist. Certain wintry branches of candles on the high chimney-piecefaintly lighted the chamber; or it would be more expressive to say, faintlytroubled its darkness. It was spacious, and I dare say had once been handsome,but every discernible thing in it was covered with dust and mould, and droppingto pieces. The most prominent object was a long table with a tablecloth spreadon it, as if a feast had been in preparation when the house and the clocks allstopped together. An epergne or centre-piece of some kind was in the middle ofthis cloth; it was so heavily overhung with cobwebs that its form was quiteundistinguishable; and, as I looked along the yellow expanse out of which Iremember its seeming to grow, like a black fungus, I saw speckle-legged spiderswith blotchy bodies running home to it, and running out from it, as if somecircumstances of the greatest public importance had just transpired in thespider community.
I heard the mice too, rattling behind the panels, as if the same occurrencewere important to their interests. But the black beetles took no notice of theagitation, and groped about the hearth in a ponderous elderly way, as if theywere short-sighted and hard of hearing, and not on terms with one another.
These crawling things had fascinated my attention, and I was watching them froma distance, when Miss Havisham laid a hand upon my shoulder. In her other handshe had a crutch-headed stick on which she leaned, and she looked like theWitch of the place.
"This," said she, pointing to the long table with her stick, "is where I willbe laid when I am dead. They shall come and look at me here."
With some vague misgiving that she might get upon the table then and there anddie at once, the complete realisation of the ghastly waxwork at the Fair, Ishrank under her touch.
"What do you think that is?" she asked me, again pointing with her stick;"that, where those cobwebs are?"
"I can't guess what it is, ma'am."
"It's a great cake. A bride-cake. Mine!"
She looked all round the room in a glaring manner, and then said, leaning on mewhile her hand twitched my shoulder, "Come, come, come! Walk me, walk me!"
I made out from this, that the work I had to do, was to walk Miss Havishamround and round the room. Accordingly, I started at once, and she leaned uponmy shoulder, and we went away at a pace that might have been an imitation(founded on my first impulse under that roof) of Mr. Pumblechook's chaise-cart.
She was not physically strong, and after a little time said, "Slower!" Still,we went at an impatient fitful speed, and as we went, she twitched the handupon my shoulder, and worked her mouth, and led me to believe that we weregoing fast because her thoughts went fast. After a while she said, "CallEstella!" so I went out on the landing and roared that name as I had done onthe previous occasion. When her light appeared, I returned to Miss Havisham,and we started away again round and round the room.
If only Estella had come to be a spectator of our proceedings, I should havefelt sufficiently discontented; but as she brought with her the three ladiesand the gentleman whom I had seen below, I didn't know what to do. In mypoliteness, I would have stopped; but Miss Havisham twitched my shoulder, andwe posted on,—with a shame-faced consciousness on my part that they would thinkit was all my doing.
"Dear Miss Havisham," said Miss Sarah Pocket. "How well you look!"
"I do not," returned Miss Havisham. "I am yellow skin and bone."
Camilla brightened when Miss Pocket met with this rebuff; and she murmured, asshe plaintively contemplated Miss Havisham, "Poor dear soul! Certainly not tobe expected to look well, poor thing. The idea!"
"And how are you?" said Miss Havisham to Camilla. As we were close toCamilla then, I would have stopped as a matter of course, only Miss Havishamwouldn't stop. We swept on, and I felt that I was highly obnoxious to Camilla.
"Thank you, Miss Havisham," she returned, "I am as well as can be expected."
"Why, what's the matter with you?" asked Miss Havisham, with exceedingsharpness.
"Nothing worth mentioning," replied Camilla. "I don't wish to make a display ofmy feelings, but I have habitually thought of you more in the night than I amquite equal to."
"Then don't think of me," retorted Miss Havisham.
"Very easily said!" remarked Camilla, amiably repressing a sob, while a hitchcame into her upper lip, and her tears overflowed. "Raymond is a witness whatginger and sal volatile I am obliged to take in the night. Raymond is a witnesswhat nervous jerkings I have in my legs. Chokings and nervous jerkings,however, are nothing new to me when I think with anxiety of those I love. If Icould be less affectionate and sensitive, I should have a better digestion andan iron set of nerves. I am sure I wish it could be so. But as to not thinkingof you in the night—The idea!" Here, a burst of tears.
The Raymond referred to, I understood to be the gentleman present, and him Iunderstood to be Mr. Camilla. He came to the rescue at this point, and said ina consolatory and complimentary voice, "Camilla, my dear, it is well known thatyour family feelings are gradually undermining you to the extent of making oneof your legs shorter than the other."
"I am not aware," observed the grave lady whose voice I had heard but once,"that to think of any person is to make a great claim upon that person, mydear."
Miss Sarah Pocket, whom I now saw to be a little dry, brown, corrugated oldwoman, with a small face that might have been made of walnut-shells, and alarge mouth like a cat's without the whiskers, supported this position bysaying, "No, indeed, my dear. Hem!"
"Thinking is easy enough," said the grave lady.
"What is easier, you know?" assented Miss Sarah Pocket.
"Oh, yes, yes!" cried Camilla, whose fermenting feelings appeared to rise fromher legs to her bosom. "It's all very true! It's a weakness to be soaffectionate, but I can't help it. No doubt my health would be much better ifit was otherwise, still I wouldn't change my disposition if I could. It's thecause of much suffering, but it's a consolation to know I possess it, when Iwake up in the night." Here another burst of feeling.
Miss Havisham and I had never stopped all this time, but kept going round andround the room; now brushing against the skirts of the visitors, now givingthem the whole length of the dismal chamber.
"There's Matthew!" said Camilla. "Never mixing with any natural ties, nevercoming here to see how Miss Havisham is! I have taken to the sofa with mystaylace cut, and have lain there hours insensible, with my head over the side,and my hair all down, and my feet I don't know where—"
("Much higher than your head, my love," said Mr. Camilla.)
"I have gone off into that state, hours and hours, on account of Matthew'sstrange and inexplicable conduct, and nobody has thanked me."
"Really I must say I should think not!" interposed the grave lady.
"You see, my dear," added Miss Sarah Pocket (a blandly vicious personage), "thequestion to put to yourself is, who did you expect to thank you, my love?"
"Without expecting any thanks, or anything of the sort," resumed Camilla, "Ihave remained in that state, hours and hours, and Raymond is a witness of theextent to which I have choked, and what the total inefficacy of ginger hasbeen, and I have been heard at the piano-forte tuner's across the street, wherethe poor mistaken children have even supposed it to be pigeons cooing at adistance,—and now to be told—" Here Camilla put her hand to her throat, andbegan to be quite chemical as to the formation of new combinations there.
When this same Matthew was mentioned, Miss Havisham stopped me and herself, andstood looking at the speaker. This change had a great influence in bringingCamilla's chemistry to a sudden end.
"Matthew will come and see me at last," said Miss Havisham, sternly, "when I amlaid on that table. That will be his place,—there," striking the table with herstick, "at my head! And yours will be there! And your husband's there! AndSarah Pocket's there! And Georgiana's there! Now you all know where to takeyour stations when you come to feast upon me. And now go!"
At the mention of each name, she had struck the table with her stick in a newplace. She now said, "Walk me, walk me!" and we went on again.
"I suppose there's nothing to be done," exclaimed Camilla, "but comply anddepart. It's something to have seen the object of one's love and duty for evenso short a time. I shall think of it with a melancholy satisfaction when I wakeup in the night. I wish Matthew could have that comfort, but he sets it atdefiance. I am determined not to make a display of my feelings, but it's veryhard to be told one wants to feast on one's relations,—as if one was aGiant,—and to be told to go. The bare idea!"
Mr. Camilla interposing, as Mrs. Camilla laid her hand upon her heaving bosom,that lady assumed an unnatural fortitude of manner which I supposed to beexpressive of an intention to drop and choke when out of view, and kissing herhand to Miss Havisham, was escorted forth. Sarah Pocket and Georgiana contendedwho should remain last; but Sarah was too knowing to be outdone, and ambledround Georgiana with that artful slipperiness that the latter was obliged totake precedence. Sarah Pocket then made her separate effect of departing with,"Bless you, Miss Havisham dear!" and with a smile of forgiving pity on herwalnut-shell countenance for the weaknesses of the rest.
While Estella was away lighting them down, Miss Havisham still walked with herhand on my shoulder, but more and more slowly. At last she stopped before thefire, and said, after muttering and looking at it some seconds,—
"This is my birthday, Pip."
I was going to wish her many happy returns, when she lifted her stick.
"I don't suffer it to be spoken of. I don't suffer those who were here justnow, or any one to speak of it. They come here on the day, but they dare notrefer to it."
Of course I made no further effort to refer to it.
"On this day of the year, long before you were born, this heap of decay,"stabbing with her crutched stick at the pile of cobwebs on the table, but nottouching it, "was brought here. It and I have worn away together. The mice havegnawed at it, and sharper teeth than teeth of mice have gnawed at me."
She held the head of her stick against her heart as she stood looking at thetable; she in her once white dress, all yellow and withered; the once whitecloth all yellow and withered; everything around in a state to crumble under atouch.
"When the ruin is complete," said she, with a ghastly look, "and when they layme dead, in my bride's dress on the bride's table,—which shall be done, andwhich will be the finished curse upon him,—so much the better if it is done onthis day!"
She stood looking at the table as if she stood looking at her own figure lyingthere. I remained quiet. Estella returned, and she too remained quiet. Itseemed to me that we continued thus for a long time. In the heavy air of theroom, and the heavy darkness that brooded in its remoter corners, I even had analarming fancy that Estella and I might presently begin to decay.
At length, not coming out of her distraught state by degrees, but in aninstant, Miss Havisham said, "Let me see you two play cards; why have you notbegun?" With that, we returned to her room, and sat down as before; I wasbeggared, as before; and again, as before, Miss Havisham watched us all thetime, directed my attention to Estella's beauty, and made me notice it the moreby trying her jewels on Estella's breast and hair.
Estella, for her part, likewise treated me as before, except that she did notcondescend to speak. When we had played some half-dozen games, a day wasappointed for my return, and I was taken down into the yard to be fed in theformer dog-like manner. There, too, I was again left to wander about as Iliked.
It is not much to the purpose whether a gate in that garden wall which I hadscrambled up to peep over on the last occasion was, on that last occasion, openor shut. Enough that I saw no gate then, and that I saw one now. As it stoodopen, and as I knew that Estella had let the visitors out,—for she had returnedwith the keys in her hand,—I strolled into the garden, and strolled all overit. It was quite a wilderness, and there were old melon-frames andcucumber-frames in it, which seemed in their decline to have produced aspontaneous growth of weak attempts at pieces of old hats and boots, with nowand then a weedy offshoot into the likeness of a battered saucepan.
When I had exhausted the garden and a greenhouse with nothing in it but afallen-down grape-vine and some bottles, I found myself in the dismal cornerupon which I had looked out of the window. Never questioning for a moment thatthe house was now empty, I looked in at another window, and found myself, to mygreat surprise, exchanging a broad stare with a pale young gentleman with redeyelids and light hair.
This pale young gentleman quickly disappeared, and reappeared beside me. He hadbeen at his books when I had found myself staring at him, and I now saw that hewas inky.
"Halloa!" said he, "young fellow!"
Halloa being a general observation which I had usually observed to be bestanswered by itself, I said, "Halloa!" politely omitting young fellow.
"Who let you in?" said he.
"Miss Estella."
"Who gave you leave to prowl about?"
"Miss Estella."
"Come and fight," said the pale young gentleman.
What could I do but follow him? I have often asked myself the question since;but what else could I do? His manner was so final, and I was so astonished,that I followed where he led, as if I had been under a spell.
"Stop a minute, though," he said, wheeling round before we had gone many paces."I ought to give you a reason for fighting, too. There it is!" In a mostirritating manner he instantly slapped his hands against one another, daintilyflung one of his legs up behind him, pulled my hair, slapped his hands again,dipped his head, and butted it into my stomach.
The bull-like proceeding last mentioned, besides that it was unquestionably tobe regarded in the light of a liberty, was particularly disagreeable just afterbread and meat. I therefore hit out at him and was going to hit out again, whenhe said, "Aha! Would you?" and began dancing backwards and forwards in a mannerquite unparalleled within my limited experience.
"Laws of the game!" said he. Here, he skipped from his left leg on to hisright. "Regular rules!" Here, he skipped from his right leg on to his left."Come to the ground, and go through the preliminaries!" Here, he dodgedbackwards and forwards, and did all sorts of things while I looked helplesslyat him.
I was secretly afraid of him when I saw him so dexterous; but I felt morallyand physically convinced that his light head of hair could have had no businessin the pit of my stomach, and that I had a right to consider it irrelevant whenso obtruded on my attention. Therefore, I followed him without a word, to aretired nook of the garden, formed by the junction of two walls and screened bysome rubbish. On his asking me if I was satisfied with the ground, and on myreplying Yes, he begged my leave to absent himself for a moment, and quicklyreturned with a bottle of water and a sponge dipped in vinegar. "Available forboth," he said, placing these against the wall. And then fell to pulling off,not only his jacket and waistcoat, but his shirt too, in a manner at oncelight-hearted, business-like, and bloodthirsty.
Although he did not look very healthy,—having pimples on his face, and abreaking out at his mouth,—these dreadful preparations quite appalled me. Ijudged him to be about my own age, but he was much taller, and he had a way ofspinning himself about that was full of appearance. For the rest, he was ayoung gentleman in a grey suit (when not denuded for battle), with his elbows,knees, wrists, and heels considerably in advance of the rest of him as todevelopment.
My heart failed me when I saw him squaring at me with every demonstration ofmechanical nicety, and eyeing my anatomy as if he were minutely choosing hisbone. I never have been so surprised in my life, as I was when I let out thefirst blow, and saw him lying on his back, looking up at me with a bloody noseand his face exceedingly fore-shortened.
But, he was on his feet directly, and after sponging himself with a great showof dexterity began squaring again. The second greatest surprise I have ever hadin my life was seeing him on his back again, looking up at me out of a blackeye.
His spirit inspired me with great respect. He seemed to have no strength, andhe never once hit me hard, and he was always knocked down; but he would be upagain in a moment, sponging himself or drinking out of the water-bottle, withthe greatest satisfaction in seconding himself according to form, and then cameat me with an air and a show that made me believe he really was going to do forme at last. He got heavily bruised, for I am sorry to record that the more Ihit him, the harder I hit him; but he came up again and again and again, untilat last he got a bad fall with the back of his head against the wall. Evenafter that crisis in our affairs, he got up and turned round and roundconfusedly a few times, not knowing where I was; but finally went on his kneesto his sponge and threw it up: at the same time panting out, "That means youhave won."
He seemed so brave and innocent, that although I had not proposed the contest,I felt but a gloomy satisfaction in my victory. Indeed, I go so far as to hopethat I regarded myself while dressing as a species of savage young wolf orother wild beast. However, I got dressed, darkly wiping my sanguinary face atintervals, and I said, "Can I help you?" and he said "No thankee," and I said"Good afternoon," and he said "Same to you."
When I got into the courtyard, I found Estella waiting with the keys. But sheneither asked me where I had been, nor why I had kept her waiting; and therewas a bright flush upon her face, as though something had happened to delighther. Instead of going straight to the gate, too, she stepped back into thepassage, and beckoned me.
"Come here! You may kiss me, if you like."
I kissed her cheek as she turned it to me. I think I would have gone through agreat deal to kiss her cheek. But I felt that the kiss was given to the coarsecommon boy as a piece of money might have been, and that it was worth nothing.
What with the birthday visitors, and what with the cards, and what with thefight, my stay had lasted so long, that when I neared home the light on thespit of sand off the point on the marshes was gleaming against a blacknight-sky, and Joe's furnace was flinging a path of fire across the road.
