
Chapter XII.
Mymind grew very uneasy on the subject of the pale young gentleman. The more Ithought of the fight, and recalled the pale young gentleman on his back invarious stages of puffy and incrimsoned countenance, the more certain itappeared that something would be done to me. I felt that the pale younggentleman's blood was on my head, and that the Law would avenge it. Withouthaving any definite idea of the penalties I had incurred, it was clear to methat village boys could not go stalking about the country, ravaging the housesof gentlefolks and pitching into the studious youth of England, without layingthemselves open to severe punishment. For some days, I even kept close at home,and looked out at the kitchen door with the greatest caution and trepidationbefore going on an errand, lest the officers of the County Jail should pounceupon me. The pale young gentleman's nose had stained my trousers, and I triedto wash out that evidence of my guilt in the dead of night. I had cut myknuckles against the pale young gentleman's teeth, and I twisted my imaginationinto a thousand tangles, as I devised incredible ways of accounting for thatdamnatory circumstance when I should be haled before the Judges.
When the day came round for my return to the scene of the deed of violence, myterrors reached their height. Whether myrmidons of Justice, especially sentdown from London, would be lying in ambush behind the gate;—whether MissHavisham, preferring to take personal vengeance for an outrage done to herhouse, might rise in those grave-clothes of hers, draw a pistol, and shoot medead:—whether suborned boys—a numerous band of mercenaries—might be engaged tofall upon me in the brewery, and cuff me until I was no more;—it was hightestimony to my confidence in the spirit of the pale young gentleman, that Inever imagined him accessory to these retaliations; they always cameinto my mind as the acts of injudicious relatives of his, goaded on by thestate of his visage and an indignant sympathy with the family features.
However, go to Miss Havisham's I must, and go I did. And behold! nothing cameof the late struggle. It was not alluded to in any way, and no pale younggentleman was to be discovered on the premises. I found the same gate open, andI explored the garden, and even looked in at the windows of the detached house;but my view was suddenly stopped by the closed shutters within, and all waslifeless. Only in the corner where the combat had taken place could I detectany evidence of the young gentleman's existence. There were traces of his gorein that spot, and I covered them with garden-mould from the eye of man.
On the broad landing between Miss Havisham's own room and that other room inwhich the long table was laid out, I saw a garden-chair,—a light chair onwheels, that you pushed from behind. It had been placed there since my lastvisit, and I entered, that same day, on a regular occupation of pushing MissHavisham in this chair (when she was tired of walking with her hand upon myshoulder) round her own room, and across the landing, and round the other room.Over and over and over again, we would make these journeys, and sometimes theywould last as long as three hours at a stretch. I insensibly fall into ageneral mention of these journeys as numerous, because it was at once settledthat I should return every alternate day at noon for these purposes, andbecause I am now going to sum up a period of at least eight or ten months.
As we began to be more used to one another, Miss Havisham talked more to me,and asked me such questions as what had I learnt and what was I going to be? Itold her I was going to be apprenticed to Joe, I believed; and I enlarged uponmy knowing nothing and wanting to know everything, in the hope that she mightoffer some help towards that desirable end. But she did not; on the contrary,she seemed to prefer my being ignorant. Neither did she ever give me anymoney,—or anything but my daily dinner,—nor ever stipulate that I should bepaid for my services.
Estella was always about, and always let me in and out, but never told me Imight kiss her again. Sometimes, she would coldly tolerate me; sometimes, shewould condescend to me; sometimes, she would be quite familiar with me;sometimes, she would tell me energetically that she hated me. Miss Havishamwould often ask me in a whisper, or when we were alone, "Does she grow prettierand prettier, Pip?" And when I said yes (for indeed she did), would seem toenjoy it greedily. Also, when we played at cards Miss Havisham would look on,with a miserly relish of Estella's moods, whatever they were. And sometimes,when her moods were so many and so contradictory of one another that I waspuzzled what to say or do, Miss Havisham would embrace her with lavishfondness, murmuring something in her ear that sounded like "Break their heartsmy pride and hope, break their hearts and have no mercy!"
There was a song Joe used to hum fragments of at the forge, of which the burdenwas Old Clem. This was not a very ceremonious way of rendering homage to apatron saint, but I believe Old Clem stood in that relation towards smiths. Itwas a song that imitated the measure of beating upon iron, and was a merelyrical excuse for the introduction of Old Clem's respected name. Thus, youwere to hammer boys round—Old Clem! With a thump and a sound—Old Clem! Beat itout, beat it out—Old Clem! With a clink for the stout—Old Clem! Blow the fire,blow the fire—Old Clem! Roaring dryer, soaring higher—Old Clem! One day soonafter the appearance of the chair, Miss Havisham suddenly saying to me, withthe impatient movement of her fingers, "There, there, there! Sing!" I wassurprised into crooning this ditty as I pushed her over the floor. It happenedso to catch her fancy that she took it up in a low brooding voice as if shewere singing in her sleep. After that, it became customary with us to have itas we moved about, and Estella would often join in; though the whole strain wasso subdued, even when there were three of us, that it made less noise in thegrim old house than the lightest breath of wind.
What could I become with these surroundings? How could my character fail to beinfluenced by them? Is it to be wondered at if my thoughts were dazed, as myeyes were, when I came out into the natural light from the misty yellow rooms?
Perhaps I might have told Joe about the pale young gentleman, if I had notpreviously been betrayed into those enormous inventions to which I hadconfessed. Under the circumstances, I felt that Joe could hardly fail todiscern in the pale young gentleman, an appropriate passenger to be put intothe black velvet coach; therefore, I said nothing of him. Besides, thatshrinking from having Miss Havisham and Estella discussed, which had come uponme in the beginning, grew much more potent as time went on. I reposed completeconfidence in no one but Biddy; but I told poor Biddy everything. Why it camenatural to me to do so, and why Biddy had a deep concern in everything I toldher, I did not know then, though I think I know now.
Meanwhile, councils went on in the kitchen at home, fraught with almostinsupportable aggravation to my exasperated spirit. That ass, Pumblechook, usedoften to come over of a night for the purpose of discussing my prospects withmy sister; and I really do believe (to this hour with less penitence than Iought to feel), that if these hands could have taken a linchpin out of hischaise-cart, they would have done it. The miserable man was a man of thatconfined stolidity of mind, that he could not discuss my prospects withouthaving me before him,—as it were, to operate upon,—and he would drag me up frommy stool (usually by the collar) where I was quiet in a corner, and, putting mebefore the fire as if I were going to be cooked, would begin by saying, "Now,Mum, here is this boy! Here is this boy which you brought up by hand. Hold upyour head, boy, and be forever grateful unto them which so did do. Now, Mum,with respections to this boy!" And then he would rumple my hair the wrongway,—which from my earliest remembrance, as already hinted, I have in my souldenied the right of any fellow-creature to do,—and would hold me before him bythe sleeve,—a spectacle of imbecility only to be equalled by himself.
Then, he and my sister would pair off in such nonsensical speculations aboutMiss Havisham, and about what she would do with me and for me, that I used towant—quite painfully—to burst into spiteful tears, fly at Pumblechook, andpummel him all over. In these dialogues, my sister spoke to me as if she weremorally wrenching one of my teeth out at every reference; while Pumblechookhimself, self-constituted my patron, would sit supervising me with adepreciatory eye, like the architect of my fortunes who thought himself engagedon a very unremunerative job.
In these discussions, Joe bore no part. But he was often talked at, while theywere in progress, by reason of Mrs. Joe's perceiving that he was not favourableto my being taken from the forge. I was fully old enough now to be apprenticedto Joe; and when Joe sat with the poker on his knees thoughtfully raking outthe ashes between the lower bars, my sister would so distinctly construe thatinnocent action into opposition on his part, that she would dive at him, takethe poker out of his hands, shake him, and put it away. There was a mostirritating end to every one of these debates. All in a moment, with nothing tolead up to it, my sister would stop herself in a yawn, and catching sight of meas it were incidentally, would swoop upon me with, "Come! there's enough ofyou! You get along to bed; you've given trouble enough forone night, I hope!" As if I had besought them as a favour to bother my lifeout.
We went on in this way for a long time, and it seemed likely that we shouldcontinue to go on in this way for a long time, when one day Miss Havishamstopped short as she and I were walking, she leaning on my shoulder; and saidwith some displeasure,—
"You are growing tall, Pip!"
I thought it best to hint, through the medium of a meditative look, that thismight be occasioned by circumstances over which I had no control.
She said no more at the time; but she presently stopped and looked at me again;and presently again; and after that, looked frowning and moody. On the next dayof my attendance, when our usual exercise was over, and I had landed her at herdressing-table, she stayed me with a movement of her impatient fingers:—
"Tell me the name again of that blacksmith of yours."
"Joe Gargery, ma'am."
"Meaning the master you were to be apprenticed to?"
"Yes, Miss Havisham."
"You had better be apprenticed at once. Would Gargery come here with you, andbring your indentures, do you think?"
I signified that I had no doubt he would take it as an honour to be asked.
"Then let him come."
"At any particular time, Miss Havisham?"
"There, there! I know nothing about times. Let him come soon, and come alongwith you."
When I got home at night, and delivered this message for Joe, my sister "wenton the Rampage," in a more alarming degree than at any previous period. Sheasked me and Joe whether we supposed she was door-mats under our feet, and howwe dared to use her so, and what company we graciously thought she wasfit for? When she had exhausted a torrent of such inquiries, she threw acandlestick at Joe, burst into a loud sobbing, got out the dustpan,—which wasalways a very bad sign,—put on her coarse apron, and began cleaning up to aterrible extent. Not satisfied with a dry cleaning, she took to a pail andscrubbing-brush, and cleaned us out of house and home, so that we stoodshivering in the back-yard. It was ten o'clock at night before we ventured tocreep in again, and then she asked Joe why he hadn't married a Negress Slave atonce? Joe offered no answer, poor fellow, but stood feeling his whisker andlooking dejectedly at me, as if he thought it really might have been a betterspeculation.
