
Chapter XIII.
It wasa trial to my feelings, on the next day but one, to see Joe arraying himself inhis Sunday clothes to accompany me to Miss Havisham's. However, as he thoughthis court-suit necessary to the occasion, it was not for me to tell him that helooked far better in his working-dress; the rather, because I knew he madehimself so dreadfully uncomfortable, entirely on my account, and that it wasfor me he pulled up his shirt-collar so very high behind, that it made the hairon the crown of his head stand up like a tuft of feathers.
At breakfast-time my sister declared her intention of going to town with us,and being left at Uncle Pumblechook's and called for "when we had done with ourfine ladies"—a way of putting the case, from which Joe appeared inclined toaugur the worst. The forge was shut up for the day, and Joe inscribed in chalkupon the door (as it was his custom to do on the very rare occasions when hewas not at work) the monosyllable HOUT, accompanied by a sketchof an arrow supposed to be flying in the direction he had taken.
We walked to town, my sister leading the way in a very large beaver bonnet, andcarrying a basket like the Great Seal of England in plaited Straw, a pair ofpattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella, though it was a fine bright day. I amnot quite clear whether these articles were carried penitentially orostentatiously; but I rather think they were displayed as articles ofproperty,—much as Cleopatra or any other sovereign lady on the Rampage mightexhibit her wealth in a pageant or procession.
When we came to Pumblechook's, my sister bounced in and left us. As it wasalmost noon, Joe and I held straight on to Miss Havisham's house. Estellaopened the gate as usual, and, the moment she appeared, Joe took his hat offand stood weighing it by the brim in both his hands; as if he had some urgentreason in his mind for being particular to half a quarter of an ounce.
Estella took no notice of either of us, but led us the way that I knew so well.I followed next to her, and Joe came last. When I looked back at Joe in thelong passage, he was still weighing his hat with the greatest care, and wascoming after us in long strides on the tips of his toes.
Estella told me we were both to go in, so I took Joe by the coat-cuff andconducted him into Miss Havisham's presence. She was seated at herdressing-table, and looked round at us immediately.
"Oh!" said she to Joe. "You are the husband of the sister of this boy?"
I could hardly have imagined dear old Joe looking so unlike himself or so likesome extraordinary bird; standing as he did speechless, with his tuft offeathers ruffled, and his mouth open as if he wanted a worm.
"You are the husband," repeated Miss Havisham, "of the sister of this boy?"
It was very aggravating; but, throughout the interview, Joe persisted inaddressing Me instead of Miss Havisham.
"Which I meantersay, Pip," Joe now observed in a manner that was at onceexpressive of forcible argumentation, strict confidence, and great politeness,"as I hup and married your sister, and I were at the time what you might call(if you was anyways inclined) a single man."
"Well!" said Miss Havisham. "And you have reared the boy, with the intention oftaking him for your apprentice; is that so, Mr. Gargery?"
"You know, Pip," replied Joe, "as you and me were ever friends, and it werelooked for'ard to betwixt us, as being calc'lated to lead to larks. Not butwhat, Pip, if you had ever made objections to the business,—such as its beingopen to black and sut, or such-like,—not but what they would have been attendedto, don't you see?"
"Has the boy," said Miss Havisham, "ever made any objection? Does he like thetrade?"
"Which it is well beknown to yourself, Pip," returned Joe, strengthening hisformer mixture of argumentation, confidence, and politeness, "that it were thewish of your own hart." (I saw the idea suddenly break upon him that he wouldadapt his epitaph to the occasion, before he went on to say) "And there weren'tno objection on your part, and Pip it were the great wish of your hart!"
It was quite in vain for me to endeavour to make him sensible that he ought tospeak to Miss Havisham. The more I made faces and gestures to him to do it, themore confidential, argumentative, and polite, he persisted in being to Me.
"Have you brought his indentures with you?" asked Miss Havisham.
"Well, Pip, you know," replied Joe, as if that were a little unreasonable, "youyourself see me put 'em in my 'at, and therefore you know as they are here."With which he took them out, and gave them, not to Miss Havisham, but to me. Iam afraid I was ashamed of the dear good fellow,—I know I was ashamed ofhim,—when I saw that Estella stood at the back of Miss Havisham's chair, andthat her eyes laughed mischievously. I took the indentures out of his hand andgave them to Miss Havisham.
"You expected," said Miss Havisham, as she looked them over, "no premium withthe boy?"
"Joe!" I remonstrated, for he made no reply at all. "Why don't you answer—"
"Pip," returned Joe, cutting me short as if he were hurt, "which I meantersaythat were not a question requiring a answer betwixt yourself and me, and whichyou know the answer to be full well No. You know it to be No, Pip, andwherefore should I say it?"
Miss Havisham glanced at him as if she understood what he really was betterthan I had thought possible, seeing what he was there; and took up a little bagfrom the table beside her.
"Pip has earned a premium here," she said, "and here it is. There arefive-and-twenty guineas in this bag. Give it to your master, Pip."
As if he were absolutely out of his mind with the wonder awakened in him by herstrange figure and the strange room, Joe, even at this pass, persisted inaddressing me.
"This is wery liberal on your part, Pip," said Joe, "and it is as such receivedand grateful welcome, though never looked for, far nor near, nor nowheres. Andnow, old chap," said Joe, conveying to me a sensation, first of burning andthen of freezing, for I felt as if that familiar expression were applied toMiss Havisham,—"and now, old chap, may we do our duty! May you and me do ourduty, both on us, by one and another, and by them which your liberalpresent—have-conweyed—to be—for the satisfaction of mind-of—them as never—"here Joe showed that he felt he had fallen into frightful difficulties, untilhe triumphantly rescued himself with the words, "and from myself far be it!"These words had such a round and convincing sound for him that he said themtwice.
"Good-bye, Pip!" said Miss Havisham. "Let them out, Estella."
"Am I to come again, Miss Havisham?" I asked.
"No. Gargery is your master now. Gargery! One word!"
Thus calling him back as I went out of the door, I heard her say to Joe in adistinct emphatic voice, "The boy has been a good boy here, and that is hisreward. Of course, as an honest man, you will expect no other and no more."
How Joe got out of the room, I have never been able to determine; but I knowthat when he did get out he was steadily proceeding upstairs instead of comingdown, and was deaf to all remonstrances until I went after him and laid hold ofhim. In another minute we were outside the gate, and it was locked, and Estellawas gone. When we stood in the daylight alone again, Joe backed up against awall, and said to me, "Astonishing!" And there he remained so long saying,"Astonishing" at intervals, so often, that I began to think his senses werenever coming back. At length he prolonged his remark into "Pip, I do assureyou this is as-TON-ishing!" and so, by degrees, becameconversational and able to walk away.
I have reason to think that Joe's intellects were brightened by the encounterthey had passed through, and that on our way to Pumblechook's he invented asubtle and deep design. My reason is to be found in what took place in Mr.Pumblechook's parlour: where, on our presenting ourselves, my sister sat inconference with that detested seedsman.
"Well?" cried my sister, addressing us both at once. "And what's happened toyou? I wonder you condescend to come back to such poor society as this,I am sure I do!"
"Miss Havisham," said Joe, with a fixed look at me, like an effort ofremembrance, "made it wery partick'ler that we should give her—were itcompliments or respects, Pip?"
"Compliments," I said.
"Which that were my own belief," answered Joe; "her compliments to Mrs. J.Gargery—"
"Much good they'll do me!" observed my sister; but rather gratified too.
"And wishing," pursued Joe, with another fixed look at me, like another effortof remembrance, "that the state of Miss Havisham's elth were sitch as wouldhave—allowed, were it, Pip?"
"Of her having the pleasure," I added.
"Of ladies' company," said Joe. And drew a long breath.
"Well!" cried my sister, with a mollified glance at Mr. Pumblechook. "She mighthave had the politeness to send that message at first, but it's better latethan never. And what did she give young Rantipole here?"
"She giv' him," said Joe, "nothing."
Mrs. Joe was going to break out, but Joe went on.
"What she giv'," said Joe, "she giv' to his friends. ‘And by his friends,' wereher explanation, ‘I mean into the hands of his sister Mrs. J. Gargery.' Themwere her words; ‘Mrs. J. Gargery.' She mayn't have know'd," added Joe, with anappearance of reflection, "whether it were Joe, or Jorge."
My sister looked at Pumblechook: who smoothed the elbows of his woodenarm-chair, and nodded at her and at the fire, as if he had known all about itbeforehand.
"And how much have you got?" asked my sister, laughing. Positively laughing!
"What would present company say to ten pound?" demanded Joe.
"They'd say," returned my sister, curtly, "pretty well. Not too much, butpretty well."
"It's more than that, then," said Joe.
That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook, immediately nodded, and said, as he rubbedthe arms of his chair, "It's more than that, Mum."
"Why, you don't mean to say—" began my sister.
"Yes I do, Mum," said Pumblechook; "but wait a bit. Go on, Joseph. Good in you!Go on!"
"What would present company say," proceeded Joe, "to twenty pound?"
"Handsome would be the word," returned my sister.
"Well, then," said Joe, "It's more than twenty pound."
That abject hypocrite, Pumblechook, nodded again, and said, with a patronizinglaugh, "It's more than that, Mum. Good again! Follow her up, Joseph!"
"Then to make an end of it," said Joe, delightedly handing the bag to mysister; "it's five-and-twenty pound."
"It's five-and-twenty pound, Mum," echoed that basest of swindlers,Pumblechook, rising to shake hands with her; "and it's no more than your merits(as I said when my opinion was asked), and I wish you joy of the money!"
If the villain had stopped here, his case would have been sufficiently awful,but he blackened his guilt by proceeding to take me into custody, with a rightof patronage that left all his former criminality far behind.
"Now you see, Joseph and wife," said Pumblechook, as he took me by the armabove the elbow, "I am one of them that always go right through with whatthey've begun. This boy must be bound, out of hand. That's my way. Boundout of hand."
"Goodness knows, Uncle Pumblechook," said my sister (grasping the money),"we're deeply beholden to you."
"Never mind me, Mum," returned that diabolical cornchandler. "A pleasure's apleasure all the world over. But this boy, you know; we must have him bound. Isaid I'd see to it—to tell you the truth."
The Justices were sitting in the Town Hall near at hand, and we at once wentover to have me bound apprentice to Joe in the Magisterial presence. I say wewent over, but I was pushed over by Pumblechook, exactly as if I had thatmoment picked a pocket or fired a rick; indeed, it was the general impressionin Court that I had been taken red-handed; for, as Pumblechook shoved me beforehim through the crowd, I heard some people say, "What's he done?" and others,"He's a young 'un, too, but looks bad, don't he?" One person of mild andbenevolent aspect even gave me a tract ornamented with a woodcut of amalevolent young man fitted up with a perfect sausage-shop of fetters, andentitled TO BE READ IN MY CELL.
The Hall was a queer place, I thought, with higher pews in it than achurch,—and with people hanging over the pews looking on,—and with mightyJustices (one with a powdered head) leaning back in chairs, with folded arms,or taking snuff, or going to sleep, or writing, or reading the newspapers,—andwith some shining black portraits on the walls, which my unartistic eyeregarded as a composition of hardbake and sticking-plaster. Here, in a cornermy indentures were duly signed and attested, and I was "bound"; Mr. Pumblechookholding me all the while as if we had looked in on our way to the scaffold, tohave those little preliminaries disposed of.
When we had come out again, and had got rid of the boys who had been put intogreat spirits by the expectation of seeing me publicly tortured, and who weremuch disappointed to find that my friends were merely rallying round me, wewent back to Pumblechook's. And there my sister became so excited by thetwenty-five guineas, that nothing would serve her but we must have a dinner outof that windfall at the Blue Boar, and that Pumblechook must go over in hischaise-cart, and bring the Hubbles and Mr. Wopsle.
It was agreed to be done; and a most melancholy day I passed. For, itinscrutably appeared to stand to reason, in the minds of the whole company,that I was an excrescence on the entertainment. And to make it worse, they allasked me from time to time,—in short, whenever they had nothing else to do,—whyI didn't enjoy myself? And what could I possibly do then, but say I wasenjoying myself,—when I wasn't!
However, they were grown up and had their own way, and they made the most ofit. That swindling Pumblechook, exalted into the beneficent contriver of thewhole occasion, actually took the top of the table; and, when he addressed themon the subject of my being bound, and had fiendishly congratulated them on mybeing liable to imprisonment if I played at cards, drank strong liquors, keptlate hours or bad company, or indulged in other vagaries which the form of myindentures appeared to contemplate as next to inevitable, he placed me standingon a chair beside him to illustrate his remarks.
My only other remembrances of the great festival are, That they wouldn't let mego to sleep, but whenever they saw me dropping off, woke me up and told me toenjoy myself. That, rather late in the evening Mr. Wopsle gave us Collins'sode, and threw his bloodstained sword in thunder down, with such effect, that awaiter came in and said, "The Commercials underneath sent up their compliments,and it wasn't the Tumblers' Arms." That, they were all in excellent spirits onthe road home, and sang, O Lady Fair! Mr. Wopsle taking the bass, and assertingwith a tremendously strong voice (in reply to the inquisitive bore who leadsthat piece of music in a most impertinent manner, by wanting to know all abouteverybody's private affairs) that he was the man with his white locksflowing, and that he was upon the whole the weakest pilgrim going.
Finally, I remember that when I got into my little bedroom, I was trulywretched, and had a strong conviction on me that I should never like Joe'strade. I had liked it once, but once was not now.
