
Chapter XIV.
It isa most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home. There may be black ingratitudein the thing, and the punishment may be retributive and well deserved; but thatit is a miserable thing, I can testify.
Home had never been a very pleasant place to me, because of my sister's temper.But, Joe had sanctified it, and I had believed in it. I had believed in thebest parlour as a most elegant saloon; I had believed in the front door, as amysterious portal of the Temple of State whose solemn opening was attended witha sacrifice of roast fowls; I had believed in the kitchen as a chaste thoughnot magnificent apartment; I had believed in the forge as the glowing road tomanhood and independence. Within a single year all this was changed. Now it wasall coarse and common, and I would not have had Miss Havisham and Estella seeit on any account.
How much of my ungracious condition of mind may have been my own fault, howmuch Miss Havisham's, how much my sister's, is now of no moment to me or to anyone. The change was made in me; the thing was done. Well or ill done, excusablyor inexcusably, it was done.
Once, it had seemed to me that when I should at last roll up my shirt-sleevesand go into the forge, Joe's 'prentice, I should be distinguished and happy.Now the reality was in my hold, I only felt that I was dusty with the dust ofsmall-coal, and that I had a weight upon my daily remembrance to which theanvil was a feather. There have been occasions in my later life (I suppose asin most lives) when I have felt for a time as if a thick curtain had fallen onall its interest and romance, to shut me out from anything save dull enduranceany more. Never has that curtain dropped so heavy and blank, as when my way inlife lay stretched out straight before me through the newly entered road ofapprenticeship to Joe.
I remember that at a later period of my "time," I used to stand about thechurchyard on Sunday evenings when night was falling, comparing my ownperspective with the windy marsh view, and making out some likeness betweenthem by thinking how flat and low both were, and how on both there came anunknown way and a dark mist and then the sea. I was quite as dejected on thefirst working-day of my apprenticeship as in that after-time; but I am glad toknow that I never breathed a murmur to Joe while my indentures lasted. It isabout the only thing I am glad to know of myself in that connection.
For, though it includes what I proceed to add, all the merit of what I proceedto add was Joe's. It was not because I was faithful, but because Joe wasfaithful, that I never ran away and went for a soldier or a sailor. It was notbecause I had a strong sense of the virtue of industry, but because Joe had astrong sense of the virtue of industry, that I worked with tolerable zealagainst the grain. It is not possible to know how far the influence of anyamiable honest-hearted duty-doing man flies out into the world; but it is verypossible to know how it has touched one's self in going by, and I know rightwell that any good that intermixed itself with my apprenticeship came of plaincontented Joe, and not of restlessly aspiring discontented me.
What I wanted, who can say? How can I say, when I never knew? What Idreaded was, that in some unlucky hour I, being at my grimiest and commonest,should lift up my eyes and see Estella looking in at one of the wooden windowsof the forge. I was haunted by the fear that she would, sooner or later, findme out, with a black face and hands, doing the coarsest part of my work, andwould exult over me and despise me. Often after dark, when I was pulling thebellows for Joe, and we were singing Old Clem, and when the thought how we usedto sing it at Miss Havisham's would seem to show me Estella's face in the fire,with her pretty hair fluttering in the wind and her eyes scorning me,—often atsuch a time I would look towards those panels of black night in the wall whichthe wooden windows then were, and would fancy that I saw her just drawing herface away, and would believe that she had come at last.
After that, when we went in to supper, the place and the meal would have a morehomely look than ever, and I would feel more ashamed of home than ever, in myown ungracious breast.
