
Chapter XV.
As Iwas getting too big for Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt's room, my education under thatpreposterous female terminated. Not, however, until Biddy had imparted to meeverything she knew, from the little catalogue of prices, to a comic song shehad once bought for a half-penny. Although the only coherent part of the latterpiece of literature were the opening lines,
     When I went to Lunnon town sirs,     Too rul loo rul     Too rul loo rul     Wasn't I done very brown sirs?     Too rul loo rul     Too rul loo rul
—still, in my desire to be wiser, I got this composition by heart with theutmost gravity; nor do I recollect that I questioned its merit, except that Ithought (as I still do) the amount of Too rul somewhat in excess of the poetry.In my hunger for information, I made proposals to Mr. Wopsle to bestow someintellectual crumbs upon me, with which he kindly complied. As it turned out,however, that he only wanted me for a dramatic lay-figure, to be contradictedand embraced and wept over and bullied and clutched and stabbed and knockedabout in a variety of ways, I soon declined that course of instruction; thoughnot until Mr. Wopsle in his poetic fury had severely mauled me.
Whatever I acquired, I tried to impart to Joe. This statement sounds so well,that I cannot in my conscience let it pass unexplained. I wanted to make Joeless ignorant and common, that he might be worthier of my society and less opento Estella's reproach.
The old Battery out on the marshes was our place of study, and a broken slateand a short piece of slate-pencil were our educational implements: to which Joealways added a pipe of tobacco. I never knew Joe to remember anything from oneSunday to another, or to acquire, under my tuition, any piece of informationwhatever. Yet he would smoke his pipe at the Battery with a far more sagaciousair than anywhere else,—even with a learned air,—as if he considered himself tobe advancing immensely. Dear fellow, I hope he did.
It was pleasant and quiet, out there with the sails on the river passing beyondthe earthwork, and sometimes, when the tide was low, looking as if theybelonged to sunken ships that were still sailing on at the bottom of the water.Whenever I watched the vessels standing out to sea with their white sailsspread, I somehow thought of Miss Havisham and Estella; and whenever the lightstruck aslant, afar off, upon a cloud or sail or green hillside or water-line,it was just the same.—Miss Havisham and Estella and the strange house and thestrange life appeared to have something to do with everything that waspicturesque.
One Sunday when Joe, greatly enjoying his pipe, had so plumed himself on being"most awful dull," that I had given him up for the day, I lay on the earthworkfor some time with my chin on my hand, descrying traces of Miss Havisham andEstella all over the prospect, in the sky and in the water, until at last Iresolved to mention a thought concerning them that had been much in my head.
"Joe," said I; "don't you think I ought to make Miss Havisham a visit?"
"Well, Pip," returned Joe, slowly considering. "What for?"
"What for, Joe? What is any visit made for?"
"There is some wisits p'r'aps," said Joe, "as for ever remains open to thequestion, Pip. But in regard to wisiting Miss Havisham. She might think youwanted something,—expected something of her."
"Don't you think I might say that I did not, Joe?"
"You might, old chap," said Joe. "And she might credit it. Similarly shemightn't."
Joe felt, as I did, that he had made a point there, and he pulled hard at hispipe to keep himself from weakening it by repetition.
"You see, Pip," Joe pursued, as soon as he was past that danger, "Miss Havishamdone the handsome thing by you. When Miss Havisham done the handsome thing byyou, she called me back to say to me as that were all."
"Yes, Joe. I heard her."
"ALL," Joe repeated, very emphatically.
"Yes, Joe. I tell you, I heard her."
"Which I meantersay, Pip, it might be that her meaning were,—Make a end onit!—As you was!—Me to the North, and you to the South!—Keep in sunders!"
I had thought of that too, and it was very far from comforting to me to findthat he had thought of it; for it seemed to render it more probable.
"But, Joe."
"Yes, old chap."
"Here am I, getting on in the first year of my time, and, since the day of mybeing bound, I have never thanked Miss Havisham, or asked after her, or shownthat I remember her."
"That's true, Pip; and unless you was to turn her out a set of shoes all fourround,—and which I meantersay as even a set of shoes all four round might notbe acceptable as a present, in a total wacancy of hoofs—"
"I don't mean that sort of remembrance, Joe; I don't mean a present."
But Joe had got the idea of a present in his head and must harp upon it. "Oreven," said he, "if you was helped to knocking her up a new chain for the frontdoor,—or say a gross or two of shark-headed screws for general use,—or somelight fancy article, such as a toasting-fork when she took her muffins,—or agridiron when she took a sprat or such like—"
"I don't mean any present at all, Joe," I interposed.
"Well," said Joe, still harping on it as though I had particularly pressed it,"if I was yourself, Pip, I wouldn't. No, I would not. For what's adoor-chain when she's got one always up? And shark-headers is open tomisrepresentations. And if it was a toasting-fork, you'd go into brass and doyourself no credit. And the oncommonest workman can't show himself oncommon ina gridiron,—for a gridiron IS a gridiron," said Joe, steadfastlyimpressing it upon me, as if he were endeavouring to rouse me from a fixeddelusion, "and you may haim at what you like, but a gridiron it will come out,either by your leave or again your leave, and you can't help yourself—"
"My dear Joe," I cried, in desperation, taking hold of his coat, "don't go onin that way. I never thought of making Miss Havisham any present."
"No, Pip," Joe assented, as if he had been contending for that, all along; "andwhat I say to you is, you are right, Pip."
"Yes, Joe; but what I wanted to say, was, that as we are rather slack just now,if you would give me a half-holiday to-morrow, I think I would go uptown andmake a call on Miss Est—Havisham."
"Which her name," said Joe, gravely, "ain't Estavisham, Pip, unless she havebeen rechris'ened."
"I know, Joe, I know. It was a slip of mine. What do you think of it, Joe?"
In brief, Joe thought that if I thought well of it, he thought well of it. But,he was particular in stipulating that if I were not received with cordiality,or if I were not encouraged to repeat my visit as a visit which had no ulteriorobject but was simply one of gratitude for a favour received, then thisexperimental trip should have no successor. By these conditions I promised toabide.
Now, Joe kept a journeyman at weekly wages whose name was Orlick. He pretendedthat his Christian name was Dolge,—a clear Impossibility,—but he was a fellowof that obstinate disposition that I believe him to have been the prey of nodelusion in this particular, but wilfully to have imposed that name upon thevillage as an affront to its understanding. He was a broadshoulderedloose-limbed swarthy fellow of great strength, never in a hurry, and alwaysslouching. He never even seemed to come to his work on purpose, but wouldslouch in as if by mere accident; and when he went to the Jolly Bargemen to eathis dinner, or went away at night, he would slouch out, like Cain or theWandering Jew, as if he had no idea where he was going and no intention of evercoming back. He lodged at a sluice-keeper's out on the marshes, and onworking-days would come slouching from his hermitage, with his hands in hispockets and his dinner loosely tied in a bundle round his neck and dangling onhis back. On Sundays he mostly lay all day on the sluice-gates, or stoodagainst ricks and barns. He always slouched, locomotively, with his eyes on theground; and, when accosted or otherwise required to raise them, he looked up ina half-resentful, half-puzzled way, as though the only thought he ever had was,that it was rather an odd and injurious fact that he should never be thinking.
This morose journeyman had no liking for me. When I was very small and timid,he gave me to understand that the Devil lived in a black corner of the forge,and that he knew the fiend very well: also that it was necessary to make up thefire, once in seven years, with a live boy, and that I might consider myselffuel. When I became Joe's 'prentice, Orlick was perhaps confirmed in somesuspicion that I should displace him; howbeit, he liked me still less. Not thathe ever said anything, or did anything, openly importing hostility; I onlynoticed that he always beat his sparks in my direction, and that whenever Isang Old Clem, he came in out of time.
Dolge Orlick was at work and present, next day, when I reminded Joe of myhalf-holiday. He said nothing at the moment, for he and Joe had just got apiece of hot iron between them, and I was at the bellows; but by and by hesaid, leaning on his hammer,—
"Now, master! Sure you're not a-going to favour only one of us. If Young Piphas a half-holiday, do as much for Old Orlick." I suppose he was aboutfive-and-twenty, but he usually spoke of himself as an ancient person.
"Why, what'll you do with a half-holiday, if you get it?" said Joe.
"What'll I do with it! What'll he do with it? I'll do as muchwith it as him," said Orlick.
"As to Pip, he's going up town," said Joe.
"Well then, as to Old Orlick, he's a-going up town," retorted thatworthy. "Two can go up town. Tain't only one wot can go up town.
"Don't lose your temper," said Joe.
"Shall if I like," growled Orlick. "Some and their uptowning! Now, master!Come. No favouring in this shop. Be a man!"
The master refusing to entertain the subject until the journeyman was in abetter temper, Orlick plunged at the furnace, drew out a red-hot bar, made atme with it as if he were going to run it through my body, whisked it round myhead, laid it on the anvil, hammered it out,—as if it were I, I thought, andthe sparks were my spirting blood,—and finally said, when he had hammeredhimself hot and the iron cold, and he again leaned on his hammer,—
"Now, master!"
"Are you all right now?" demanded Joe.
"Ah! I am all right," said gruff Old Orlick.
"Then, as in general you stick to your work as well as most men," said Joe,"let it be a half-holiday for all."
My sister had been standing silent in the yard, within hearing,—she was a mostunscrupulous spy and listener,—and she instantly looked in at one of thewindows.
"Like you, you fool!" said she to Joe, "giving holidays to great idle hulkerslike that. You are a rich man, upon my life, to waste wages in that way. I wishI was his master!"
"You'd be everybody's master, if you durst," retorted Orlick, with anill-favoured grin.
("Let her alone," said Joe.)
"I'd be a match for all noodles and all rogues," returned my sister, beginningto work herself into a mighty rage. "And I couldn't be a match for the noodles,without being a match for your master, who's the dunder-headed king of thenoodles. And I couldn't be a match for the rogues, without being a match foryou, who are the blackest-looking and the worst rogue between this and France.Now!"
"You're a foul shrew, Mother Gargery," growled the journeyman. "If that makes ajudge of rogues, you ought to be a good'un."
("Let her alone, will you?" said Joe.)
"What did you say?" cried my sister, beginning to scream. "What did you say?What did that fellow Orlick say to me, Pip? What did he call me, with myhusband standing by? Oh! oh! oh!" Each of these exclamations was a shriek; andI must remark of my sister, what is equally true of all the violent women Ihave ever seen, that passion was no excuse for her, because it is undeniablethat instead of lapsing into passion, she consciously and deliberately tookextraordinary pains to force herself into it, and became blindly furious byregular stages; "what was the name he gave me before the base man who swore todefend me? Oh! Hold me! Oh!"
"Ah-h-h!" growled the journeyman, between his teeth, "I'd hold you, if you wasmy wife. I'd hold you under the pump, and choke it out of you."
("I tell you, let her alone," said Joe.)
"Oh! To hear him!" cried my sister, with a clap of her hands and a screamtogether,—which was her next stage. "To hear the names he's giving me! ThatOrlick! In my own house! Me, a married woman! With my husband standing by! Oh!Oh!" Here my sister, after a fit of clappings and screamings, beat her handsupon her bosom and upon her knees, and threw her cap off, and pulled her hairdown,—which were the last stages on her road to frenzy. Being by this time aperfect Fury and a complete success, she made a dash at the door which I hadfortunately locked.
What could the wretched Joe do now, after his disregarded parentheticalinterruptions, but stand up to his journeyman, and ask him what he meant byinterfering betwixt himself and Mrs. Joe; and further whether he was man enoughto come on? Old Orlick felt that the situation admitted of nothing less thancoming on, and was on his defence straightway; so, without so much as pullingoff their singed and burnt aprons, they went at one another, like two giants.But, if any man in that neighbourhood could stand uplong against Joe, I neversaw the man. Orlick, as if he had been of no more account than the pale younggentleman, was very soon among the coal-dust, and in no hurry to come out ofit. Then Joe unlocked the door and picked up my sister, who had droppedinsensible at the window (but who had seen the fight first, I think), and whowas carried into the house and laid down, and who was recommended to revive,and would do nothing but struggle and clench her hands in Joe's hair. Then camethat singular calm and silence which succeed all uproars; and then, with thevague sensation which I have always connected with such a lull,—namely, that itwas Sunday, and somebody was dead,—I went upstairs to dress myself.




When I came down again, I found Joe and Orlick sweeping up, without any othertraces of discomposure than a slit in one of Orlick's nostrils, which wasneither expressive nor ornamental. A pot of beer had appeared from the JollyBargemen, and they were sharing it by turns in a peaceable manner. The lull hada sedative and philosophical influence on Joe, who followed me out into theroad to say, as a parting observation that might do me good, "On the Rampage,Pip, and off the Rampage, Pip:—such is Life!"
With what absurd emotions (for we think the feelings that are very serious in aman quite comical in a boy) I found myself again going to Miss Havisham's,matters little here. Nor, how I passed and repassed the gate many times beforeI could make up my mind to ring. Nor, how I debated whether I should go awaywithout ringing; nor, how I should undoubtedly have gone, if my time had beenmy own, to come back.
Miss Sarah Pocket came to the gate. No Estella.
"How, then? You here again?" said Miss Pocket. "What do you want?"
When I said that I only came to see how Miss Havisham was, Sarah evidentlydeliberated whether or no she should send me about my business. But unwillingto hazard the responsibility, she let me in, and presently brought the sharpmessage that I was to "come up."
Everything was unchanged, and Miss Havisham was alone.
"Well?" said she, fixing her eyes upon me. "I hope you want nothing? You'll getnothing."
"No indeed, Miss Havisham. I only wanted you to know that I am doing very wellin my apprenticeship, and am always much obliged to you."
"There, there!" with the old restless fingers. "Come now and then; come on yourbirthday.—Ay!" she cried suddenly, turning herself and her chair towards me,"You are looking round for Estella? Hey?"
I had been looking round,—in fact, for Estella,—and I stammered that I hopedshe was well.
"Abroad," said Miss Havisham; "educating for a lady; far out of reach; prettierthan ever; admired by all who see her. Do you feel that you have lost her?"
There was such a malignant enjoyment in her utterance of the last words, andshe broke into such a disagreeable laugh, that I was at a loss what to say. Shespared me the trouble of considering, by dismissing me. When the gate wasclosed upon me by Sarah of the walnut-shell countenance, I felt more than everdissatisfied with my home and with my trade and with everything; and that wasall I took by that motion.
As I was loitering along the High Street, looking in disconsolately at the shopwindows, and thinking what I would buy if I were a gentleman, who should comeout of the bookshop but Mr. Wopsle. Mr. Wopsle had in his hand the affectingtragedy of George Barnwell, in which he had that moment invested sixpence, withthe view of heaping every word of it on the head of Pumblechook, with whom hewas going to drink tea. No sooner did he see me, than he appeared to considerthat a special Providence had put a 'prentice in his way to be read at; and helaid hold of me, and insisted on my accompanying him to the Pumblechookianparlour. As I knew it would be miserable at home, and as the nights were darkand the way was dreary, and almost any companionship on the road was betterthan none, I made no great resistance; consequently, we turned intoPumblechook's just as the street and the shops were lighting up.
As I never assisted at any other representation of George Barnwell, I don'tknow how long it may usually take; but I know very well that it took untilhalf-past nine o' clock that night, and that when Mr. Wopsle got into Newgate,I thought he never would go to the scaffold, he became so much slower than atany former period of his disgraceful career. I thought it a little too muchthat he should complain of being cut short in his flower after all, as if hehad not been running to seed, leaf after leaf, ever since his course began.This, however, was a mere question of length and wearisomeness. What stung me,was the identification of the whole affair with my unoffending self. WhenBarnwell began to go wrong, I declare that I felt positively apologetic,Pumblechook's indignant stare so taxed me with it. Wopsle, too, took pains topresent me in the worst light. At once ferocious and maudlin, I was made tomurder my uncle with no extenuating circumstances whatever; Millwood put medown in argument, on every occasion; it became sheer monomania in my master'sdaughter to care a button for me; and all I can say for my gasping andprocrastinating conduct on the fatal morning, is, that it was worthy of thegeneral feebleness of my character. Even after I was happily hanged and Wopslehad closed the book, Pumblechook sat staring at me, and shaking his head, andsaying, "Take warning, boy, take warning!" as if it were a well-known fact thatI contemplated murdering a near relation, provided I could only induce one tohave the weakness to become my benefactor.
It was a very dark night when it was all over, and when I set out with Mr.Wopsle on the walk home. Beyond town, we found a heavy mist out, and it fellwet and thick. The turnpike lamp was a blur, quite out of the lamp's usualplace apparently, and its rays looked solid substance on the fog. We werenoticing this, and saying how that the mist rose with a change of wind from acertain quarter of our marshes, when we came upon a man, slouching under thelee of the turnpike house.
"Halloa!" we said, stopping. "Orlick there?"
"Ah!" he answered, slouching out. "I was standing by a minute, on the chance ofcompany."
"You are late," I remarked.
Orlick not unnaturally answered, "Well? And you're late."
"We have been," said Mr. Wopsle, exalted with his late performance,—"we havebeen indulging, Mr. Orlick, in an intellectual evening."
Old Orlick growled, as if he had nothing to say about that, and we all went ontogether. I asked him presently whether he had been spending his half-holidayup and down town?
"Yes," said he, "all of it. I come in behind yourself. I didn't see you, but Imust have been pretty close behind you. By the by, the guns is going again."
"At the Hulks?" said I.
"Ay! There's some of the birds flown from the cages. The guns have been goingsince dark, about. You'll hear one presently."
In effect, we had not walked many yards further, when the well-remembered boomcame towards us, deadened by the mist, and heavily rolled away along the lowgrounds by the river, as if it were pursuing and threatening the fugitives.
"A good night for cutting off in," said Orlick. "We'd be puzzled how to bringdown a jail-bird on the wing, to-night."
The subject was a suggestive one to me, and I thought about it in silence. Mr.Wopsle, as the ill-requited uncle of the evening's tragedy, fell to meditatingaloud in his garden at Camberwell. Orlick, with his hands in his pockets,slouched heavily at my side. It was very dark, very wet, very muddy, and so wesplashed along. Now and then, the sound of the signal cannon broke upon usagain, and again rolled sulkily along the course of the river. I kept myself tomyself and my thoughts. Mr. Wopsle died amiably at Camberwell, and exceedinglygame on Bosworth Field, and in the greatest agonies at Glastonbury. Orlicksometimes growled, "Beat it out, beat it out,—Old Clem! With a clink for thestout,—Old Clem!" I thought he had been drinking, but he was not drunk.
Thus, we came to the village. The way by which we approached it took us pastthe Three Jolly Bargemen, which we were surprised to find—it being eleveno'clock—in a state of commotion, with the door wide open, and unwonted lightsthat had been hastily caught up and put down scattered about. Mr. Wopsledropped in to ask what was the matter (surmising that a convict had beentaken), but came running out in a great hurry.
"There's something wrong," said he, without stopping, "up at your place, Pip.Run all!"
"What is it?" I asked, keeping up with him. So did Orlick, at my side.
"I can't quite understand. The house seems to have been violently entered whenJoe Gargery was out. Supposed by convicts. Somebody has been attacked andhurt."
We were running too fast to admit of more being said, and we made no stop untilwe got into our kitchen. It was full of people; the whole village was there, orin the yard; and there was a surgeon, and there was Joe, and there were a groupof women, all on the floor in the midst of the kitchen. The unemployedbystanders drew back when they saw me, and so I became aware of mysister,—lying without sense or movement on the bare boards where she had beenknocked down by a tremendous blow on the back of the head, dealt by someunknown hand when her face was turned towards the fire,—destined never to be onthe Rampage again, while she was the wife of Joe.
