
Chapter XVI.
Withmy head full of George Barnwell, I was at first disposed to believe thatI must have had some hand in the attack upon my sister, or at all eventsthat as her near relation, popularly known to be under obligations to her, Iwas a more legitimate object of suspicion than any one else. But when, in theclearer light of next morning, I began to reconsider the matter and to hear itdiscussed around me on all sides, I took another view of the case, which wasmore reasonable.
Joe had been at the Three Jolly Bargemen, smoking his pipe, from a quarterafter eight o'clock to a quarter before ten. While he was there, my sister hadbeen seen standing at the kitchen door, and had exchanged Good Night with afarm-labourer going home. The man could not be more particular as to the timeat which he saw her (he got into dense confusion when he tried to be), thanthat it must have been before nine. When Joe went home at five minutes beforeten, he found her struck down on the floor, and promptly called in assistance.The fire had not then burnt unusually low, nor was the snuff of the candle verylong; the candle, however, had been blown out.
Nothing had been taken away from any part of the house. Neither, beyond theblowing out of the candle,—which stood on a table between the door and mysister, and was behind her when she stood facing the fire and was struck,—wasthere any disarrangement of the kitchen, excepting such as she herself hadmade, in falling and bleeding. But, there was one remarkable piece of evidenceon the spot. She had been struck with something blunt and heavy, on the headand spine; after the blows were dealt, something heavy had been thrown down ather with considerable violence, as she lay on her face. And on the groundbeside her, when Joe picked her up, was a convict's leg-iron which had beenfiled asunder.
Now, Joe, examining this iron with a smith's eye, declared it to have beenfiled asunder some time ago. The hue and cry going off to the Hulks, and peoplecoming thence to examine the iron, Joe's opinion was corroborated. They did notundertake to say when it had left the prison-ships to which it undoubtedly hadonce belonged; but they claimed to know for certain that that particularmanacle had not been worn by either of the two convicts who had escaped lastnight. Further, one of those two was already retaken, and had not freed himselfof his iron.
Knowing what I knew, I set up an inference of my own here. I believed the ironto be my convict's iron,—the iron I had seen and heard him filing at, on themarshes,—but my mind did not accuse him of having put it to its latest use. ForI believed one of two other persons to have become possessed of it, and to haveturned it to this cruel account. Either Orlick, or the strange man who hadshown me the file.
Now, as to Orlick; he had gone to town exactly as he told us when we picked himup at the turnpike, he had been seen about town all the evening, he had been indivers companies in several public-houses, and he had come back with myself andMr. Wopsle. There was nothing against him, save the quarrel; and my sister hadquarrelled with him, and with everybody else about her, ten thousand times. Asto the strange man; if he had come back for his two bank-notes there could havebeen no dispute about them, because my sister was fully prepared to restorethem. Besides, there had been no altercation; the assailant had come in sosilently and suddenly, that she had been felled before she could look round.
It was horrible to think that I had provided the weapon, however undesignedly,but I could hardly think otherwise. I suffered unspeakable trouble while Iconsidered and reconsidered whether I should at last dissolve that spell of mychildhood and tell Joe all the story. For months afterwards, I every daysettled the question finally in the negative, and reopened and reargued it nextmorning. The contention came, after all, to this;—the secret was such an oldone now, had so grown into me and become a part of myself, that I could nottear it away. In addition to the dread that, having led up to so much mischief,it would be now more likely than ever to alienate Joe from me if he believedit, I had a further restraining dread that he would not believe it, but wouldassort it with the fabulous dogs and veal-cutlets as a monstrous invention.However, I temporized with myself, of course—for, was I not wavering betweenright and wrong, when the thing is always done?—and resolved to make a fulldisclosure if I should see any such new occasion as a new chance of helping inthe discovery of the assailant.
The Constables and the Bow Street men from London—for, this happened in thedays of the extinct red-waistcoated police—were about the house for a week ortwo, and did pretty much what I have heard and read of like authorities doingin other such cases. They took up several obviously wrong people, and they rantheir heads very hard against wrong ideas, and persisted in trying to fit thecircumstances to the ideas, instead of trying to extract ideas from thecircumstances. Also, they stood about the door of the Jolly Bargemen, withknowing and reserved looks that filled the whole neighbourhood with admiration;and they had a mysterious manner of taking their drink, that was almost as goodas taking the culprit. But not quite, for they never did it.
Long after these constitutional powers had dispersed, my sister lay very ill inbed. Her sight was disturbed, so that she saw objects multiplied, and graspedat visionary teacups and wineglasses instead of the realities; her hearing wasgreatly impaired; her memory also; and her speech was unintelligible. When, atlast, she came round so far as to be helped downstairs, it was still necessaryto keep my slate always by her, that she might indicate in writing what shecould not indicate in speech. As she was (very bad handwriting apart) a morethan indifferent speller, and as Joe was a more than indifferent reader,extraordinary complications arose between them which I was always called in tosolve. The administration of mutton instead of medicine, the substitution ofTea for Joe, and the baker for bacon, were among the mildest of my ownmistakes.
However, her temper was greatly improved, and she was patient. A tremulousuncertainty of the action of all her limbs soon became a part of her regularstate, and afterwards, at intervals of two or three months, she would often puther hands to her head, and would then remain for about a week at a time in somegloomy aberration of mind. We were at a loss to find a suitable attendant forher, until a circumstance happened conveniently to relieve us. Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt conquered a confirmed habit of living into which she had fallen, andBiddy became a part of our establishment.
It may have been about a month after my sister's reappearance in the kitchen,when Biddy came to us with a small speckled box containing the whole of herworldly effects, and became a blessing to the household. Above all, she was ablessing to Joe, for the dear old fellow was sadly cut up by the constantcontemplation of the wreck of his wife, and had been accustomed, whileattending on her of an evening, to turn to me every now and then and say, withhis blue eyes moistened, "Such a fine figure of a woman as she once were, Pip!"Biddy instantly taking the cleverest charge of her as though she had studiedher from infancy; Joe became able in some sort to appreciate the greater quietof his life, and to get down to the Jolly Bargemen now and then for a changethat did him good. It was characteristic of the police people that they had allmore or less suspected poor Joe (though he never knew it), and that they had toa man concurred in regarding him as one of the deepest spirits they had everencountered.
Biddy's first triumph in her new office, was to solve a difficulty that hadcompletely vanquished me. I had tried hard at it, but had made nothing of it.Thus it was:—
Again and again and again, my sister had traced upon the slate, a characterthat looked like a curious T, and then with the utmost eagerness had called ourattention to it as something she particularly wanted. I had in vain triedeverything producible that began with a T, from tar to toast and tub. At lengthit had come into my head that the sign looked like a hammer, and on my lustilycalling that word in my sister's ear, she had begun to hammer on the table andhad expressed a qualified assent. Thereupon, I had brought in all our hammers,one after another, but without avail. Then I bethought me of a crutch, theshape being much the same, and I borrowed one in the village, and displayed itto my sister with considerable confidence. But she shook her head to thatextent when she was shown it, that we were terrified lest in her weak andshattered state she should dislocate her neck.
When my sister found that Biddy was very quick to understand her, thismysterious sign reappeared on the slate. Biddy looked thoughtfully at it, heardmy explanation, looked thoughtfully at my sister, looked thoughtfully at Joe(who was always represented on the slate by his initial letter), and ran intothe forge, followed by Joe and me.
"Why, of course!" cried Biddy, with an exultant face. "Don't you see? It'shim!"
Orlick, without a doubt! She had lost his name, and could only signify him byhis hammer. We told him why we wanted him to come into the kitchen, and heslowly laid down his hammer, wiped his brow with his arm, took another wipe atit with his apron, and came slouching out, with a curious loose vagabond bendin the knees that strongly distinguished him.
I confess that I expected to see my sister denounce him, and that I wasdisappointed by the different result. She manifested the greatest anxiety to beon good terms with him, was evidently much pleased by his being at lengthproduced, and motioned that she would have him given something to drink. Shewatched his countenance as if she were particularly wishful to be assured thathe took kindly to his reception, she showed every possible desire to conciliatehim, and there was an air of humble propitiation in all she did, such as I haveseen pervade the bearing of a child towards a hard master. After that day, aday rarely passed without her drawing the hammer on her slate, and withoutOrlick's slouching in and standing doggedly before her, as if he knew no morethan I did what to make of it.
