
Chapter XVII.
I nowfell into a regular routine of apprenticeship life, which was varied beyond thelimits of the village and the marshes, by no more remarkable circumstance thanthe arrival of my birthday and my paying another visit to Miss Havisham. Ifound Miss Sarah Pocket still on duty at the gate; I found Miss Havisham justas I had left her, and she spoke of Estella in the very same way, if not in thevery same words. The interview lasted but a few minutes, and she gave me aguinea when I was going, and told me to come again on my next birthday. I maymention at once that this became an annual custom. I tried to decline takingthe guinea on the first occasion, but with no better effect than causing her toask me very angrily, if I expected more? Then, and after that, I took it.
So unchanging was the dull old house, the yellow light in the darkened room,the faded spectre in the chair by the dressing-table glass, that I felt as ifthe stopping of the clocks had stopped Time in that mysterious place, and,while I and everything else outside it grew older, it stood still. Daylightnever entered the house as to my thoughts and remembrances of it, any more thanas to the actual fact. It bewildered me, and under its influence I continued atheart to hate my trade and to be ashamed of home.
Imperceptibly I became conscious of a change in Biddy, however. Her shoes cameup at the heel, her hair grew bright and neat, her hands were always clean. Shewas not beautiful,—she was common, and could not be like Estella,—but she waspleasant and wholesome and sweet-tempered. She had not been with us more than ayear (I remember her being newly out of mourning at the time it struck me),when I observed to myself one evening that she had curiously thoughtful andattentive eyes; eyes that were very pretty and very good.
It came of my lifting up my own eyes from a task I was poring at—writing somepassages from a book, to improve myself in two ways at once by a sort ofstratagem—and seeing Biddy observant of what I was about. I laid down my pen,and Biddy stopped in her needlework without laying it down.
"Biddy," said I, "how do you manage it? Either I am very stupid, or you arevery clever."
"What is it that I manage? I don't know," returned Biddy, smiling.
She managed our whole domestic life, and wonderfully too; but I did not meanthat, though that made what I did mean more surprising.
"How do you manage, Biddy," said I, "to learn everything that I learn, andalways to keep up with me?" I was beginning to be rather vain of my knowledge,for I spent my birthday guineas on it, and set aside the greater part of mypocket-money for similar investment; though I have no doubt, now, that thelittle I knew was extremely dear at the price.
"I might as well ask you," said Biddy, "how you manage?"
"No; because when I come in from the forge of a night, any one can see meturning to at it. But you never turn to at it, Biddy."
"I suppose I must catch it like a cough," said Biddy, quietly; and went on withher sewing.
Pursuing my idea as I leaned back in my wooden chair, and looked at Biddysewing away with her head on one side, I began to think her rather anextraordinary girl. For I called to mind now, that she was equally accomplishedin the terms of our trade, and the names of our different sorts of work, andour various tools. In short, whatever I knew, Biddy knew. Theoretically, shewas already as good a blacksmith as I, or better.
"You are one of those, Biddy," said I, "who make the most of every chance. Younever had a chance before you came here, and see how improved you are!"
Biddy looked at me for an instant, and went on with her sewing. "I was yourfirst teacher though; wasn't I?" said she, as she sewed.
"Biddy!" I exclaimed, in amazement. "Why, you are crying!"
"No I am not," said Biddy, looking up and laughing. "What put that in yourhead?"
What could have put it in my head but the glistening of a tear as it dropped onher work? I sat silent, recalling what a drudge she had been until Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt successfully overcame that bad habit of living, so highly desirableto be got rid of by some people. I recalled the hopeless circumstances by whichshe had been surrounded in the miserable little shop and the miserable littlenoisy evening school, with that miserable old bundle of incompetence always tobe dragged and shouldered. I reflected that even in those untoward times theremust have been latent in Biddy what was now developing, for, in my firstuneasiness and discontent I had turned to her for help, as a matter of course.Biddy sat quietly sewing, shedding no more tears, and while I looked at her andthought about it all, it occurred to me that perhaps I had not beensufficiently grateful to Biddy. I might have been too reserved, and should havepatronised her more (though I did not use that precise word in my meditations)with my confidence.
"Yes, Biddy," I observed, when I had done turning it over, "you were my firstteacher, and that at a time when we little thought of ever being together likethis, in this kitchen."
"Ah, poor thing!" replied Biddy. It was like her self-forgetfulness to transferthe remark to my sister, and to get up and be busy about her, making her morecomfortable; "that's sadly true!"
"Well!" said I, "we must talk together a little more, as we used to do. And Imust consult you a little more, as I used to do. Let us have a quiet walk onthe marshes next Sunday, Biddy, and a long chat."
My sister was never left alone now; but Joe more than readily undertook thecare of her on that Sunday afternoon, and Biddy and I went out together. It wassummer-time, and lovely weather. When we had passed the village and the churchand the churchyard, and were out on the marshes and began to see the sails ofthe ships as they sailed on, I began to combine Miss Havisham and Estella withthe prospect, in my usual way. When we came to the river-side and sat down onthe bank, with the water rippling at our feet, making it all more quiet than itwould have been without that sound, I resolved that it was a good time andplace for the admission of Biddy into my inner confidence.
"Biddy," said I, after binding her to secrecy, "I want to be a gentleman."
"O, I wouldn't, if I was you!" she returned. "I don't think it would answer."
"Biddy," said I, with some severity, "I have particular reasons for wanting tobe a gentleman."
"You know best, Pip; but don't you think you are happier as you are?"
"Biddy," I exclaimed, impatiently, "I am not at all happy as I am. I amdisgusted with my calling and with my life. I have never taken to either, sinceI was bound. Don't be absurd."
"Was I absurd?" said Biddy, quietly raising her eyebrows; "I am sorry for that;I didn't mean to be. I only want you to do well, and to be comfortable."
"Well, then, understand once for all that I never shall or can becomfortable—or anything but miserable—there, Biddy!—unless I can lead a verydifferent sort of life from the life I lead now."
"That's a pity!" said Biddy, shaking her head with a sorrowful air.
Now, I too had so often thought it a pity, that, in the singular kind ofquarrel with myself which I was always carrying on, I was half inclined to shedtears of vexation and distress when Biddy gave utterance to her sentiment andmy own. I told her she was right, and I knew it was much to be regretted, butstill it was not to be helped.
"If I could have settled down," I said to Biddy, plucking up the short grasswithin reach, much as I had once upon a time pulled my feelings out of my hairand kicked them into the brewery wall,—"if I could have settled down and beenbut half as fond of the forge as I was when I was little, I know it would havebeen much better for me. You and I and Joe would have wanted nothing then, andJoe and I would perhaps have gone partners when I was out of my time, and Imight even have grown up to keep company with you, and we might have sat onthis very bank on a fine Sunday, quite different people. I should have beengood enough for you; shouldn't I, Biddy?"
Biddy sighed as she looked at the ships sailing on, and returned for answer,"Yes; I am not over-particular." It scarcely sounded flattering, but I knew shemeant well.
"Instead of that," said I, plucking up more grass and chewing a blade or two,"see how I am going on. Dissatisfied, and uncomfortable, and—what would itsignify to me, being coarse and common, if nobody had told me so!"
Biddy turned her face suddenly towards mine, and looked far more attentively atme than she had looked at the sailing ships.
"It was neither a very true nor a very polite thing to say," she remarked,directing her eyes to the ships again. "Who said it?"
I was disconcerted, for I had broken away without quite seeing where I wasgoing to. It was not to be shuffled off now, however, and I answered, "Thebeautiful young lady at Miss Havisham's, and she's more beautiful than anybodyever was, and I admire her dreadfully, and I want to be a gentleman on heraccount." Having made this lunatic confession, I began to throw my torn-upgrass into the river, as if I had some thoughts of following it.
"Do you want to be a gentleman, to spite her or to gain her over?" Biddyquietly asked me, after a pause.
"I don't know," I moodily answered.
"Because, if it is to spite her," Biddy pursued, "I should think—but you knowbest—that might be better and more independently done by caring nothing for herwords. And if it is to gain her over, I should think—but you know best—she wasnot worth gaining over."
Exactly what I myself had thought, many times. Exactly what was perfectlymanifest to me at the moment. But how could I, a poor dazed village lad, avoidthat wonderful inconsistency into which the best and wisest of men fall everyday?
"It may be all quite true," said I to Biddy, "but I admire her dreadfully."
In short, I turned over on my face when I came to that, and got a good grasp onthe hair on each side of my head, and wrenched it well. All the while knowingthe madness of my heart to be so very mad and misplaced, that I was quiteconscious it would have served my face right, if I had lifted it up by my hair,and knocked it against the pebbles as a punishment for belonging to such anidiot.
Biddy was the wisest of girls, and she tried to reason no more with me. She puther hand, which was a comfortable hand though roughened by work, upon my hands,one after another, and gently took them out of my hair. Then she softly pattedmy shoulder in a soothing way, while with my face upon my sleeve I cried alittle,—exactly as I had done in the brewery yard,—and felt vaguely convincedthat I was very much ill-used by somebody, or by everybody; I can't say which.
"I am glad of one thing," said Biddy, "and that is, that you have felt youcould give me your confidence, Pip. And I am glad of another thing, and thatis, that of course you know you may depend upon my keeping it and always so fardeserving it. If your first teacher (dear! such a poor one, and so much in needof being taught herself!) had been your teacher at the present time, she thinksshe knows what lesson she would set. But it would be a hard one to learn, andyou have got beyond her, and it's of no use now." So, with a quiet sigh for me,Biddy rose from the bank, and said, with a fresh and pleasant change of voice,"Shall we walk a little farther, or go home?"
"Biddy," I cried, getting up, putting my arm round her neck, and giving her akiss, "I shall always tell you everything."
"Till you're a gentleman," said Biddy.
"You know I never shall be, so that's always. Not that I have any occasion totell you anything, for you know everything I know,—as I told you at home theother night."
"Ah!" said Biddy, quite in a whisper, as she looked away at the ships. And thenrepeated, with her former pleasant change, "shall we walk a little farther, orgo home?"
I said to Biddy we would walk a little farther, and we did so, and the summerafternoon toned down into the summer evening, and it was very beautiful. Ibegan to consider whether I was not more naturally and wholesomely situated,after all, in these circumstances, than playing beggar my neighbour bycandle-light in the room with the stopped clocks, and being despised byEstella. I thought it would be very good for me if I could get her out of myhead, with all the rest of those remembrances and fancies, and could go to workdetermined to relish what I had to do, and stick to it, and make the best ofit. I asked myself the question whether I did not surely know that if Estellawere beside me at that moment instead of Biddy, she would make me miserable? Iwas obliged to admit that I did know it for a certainty, and I said to myself,"Pip, what a fool you are!"
We talked a good deal as we walked, and all that Biddy said seemed right. Biddywas never insulting, or capricious, or Biddy to-day and somebody elseto-morrow; she would have derived only pain, and no pleasure, from giving mepain; she would far rather have wounded her own breast than mine. How could itbe, then, that I did not like her much the better of the two?
"Biddy," said I, when we were walking homeward, "I wish you could put meright."
"I wish I could!" said Biddy.
"If I could only get myself to fall in love with you,—you don't mind myspeaking so openly to such an old acquaintance?"
"Oh dear, not at all!" said Biddy. "Don't mind me."
"If I could only get myself to do it, that would be the thing for me."
"But you never will, you see," said Biddy.
It did not appear quite so unlikely to me that evening, as it would have doneif we had discussed it a few hours before. I therefore observed I was not quitesure of that. But Biddy said she was, and she said it decisively. In myheart I believed her to be right; and yet I took it rather ill, too, that sheshould be so positive on the point.
When we came near the churchyard, we had to cross an embankment, and get over astile near a sluice-gate. There started up, from the gate, or from the rushes,or from the ooze (which was quite in his stagnant way), Old Orlick.
"Halloa!" he growled, "where are you two going?"
"Where should we be going, but home?"
"Well, then," said he, "I'm jiggered if I don't see you home!"
This penalty of being jiggered was a favourite supposititious case of his. Heattached no definite meaning to the word that I am aware of, but used it, likehis own pretended Christian name, to affront mankind, and convey an idea ofsomething savagely damaging. When I was younger, I had had a general beliefthat if he had jiggered me personally, he would have done it with a sharp andtwisted hook.
Biddy was much against his going with us, and said to me in a whisper, "Don'tlet him come; I don't like him." As I did not like him either, I took theliberty of saying that we thanked him, but we didn't want seeing home. Hereceived that piece of information with a yell of laughter, and dropped back,but came slouching after us at a little distance.
Curious to know whether Biddy suspected him of having had a hand in thatmurderous attack of which my sister had never been able to give any account, Iasked her why she did not like him.
"Oh!" she replied, glancing over her shoulder as he slouched after us, "becauseI—I am afraid he likes me."
"Did he ever tell you he liked you?" I asked indignantly.
"No," said Biddy, glancing over her shoulder again, "he never told me so; buthe dances at me, whenever he can catch my eye."
However novel and peculiar this testimony of attachment, I did not doubt theaccuracy of the interpretation. I was very hot indeed upon Old Orlick's daringto admire her; as hot as if it were an outrage on myself.
"But it makes no difference to you, you know," said Biddy, calmly.
"No, Biddy, it makes no difference to me; only I don't like it; I don't approveof it."
"Nor I neither," said Biddy. "Though that makes no difference to you."
"Exactly," said I; "but I must tell you I should have no opinion of you, Biddy,if he danced at you with your own consent."
I kept an eye on Orlick after that night, and, whenever circumstances werefavourable to his dancing at Biddy, got before him to obscure thatdemonstration. He had struck root in Joe's establishment, by reason of mysister's sudden fancy for him, or I should have tried to get him dismissed. Hequite understood and reciprocated my good intentions, as I had reason to knowthereafter.
And now, because my mind was not confused enough before, I complicated itsconfusion fifty thousand-fold, by having states and seasons when I was clearthat Biddy was immeasurably better than Estella, and that the plain honestworking life to which I was born had nothing in it to be ashamed of, butoffered me sufficient means of self-respect and happiness. At those times, Iwould decide conclusively that my disaffection to dear old Joe and the forgewas gone, and that I was growing up in a fair way to be partners with Joe andto keep company with Biddy,—when all in a moment some confounding remembranceof the Havisham days would fall upon me like a destructive missile, and scattermy wits again. Scattered wits take a long time picking up; and often before Ihad got them well together, they would be dispersed in all directions by onestray thought, that perhaps after all Miss Havisham was going to make myfortune when my time was out.
If my time had run out, it would have left me still at the height of myperplexities, I dare say. It never did run out, however, but was brought to apremature end, as I proceed to relate.
