
Chapter XVIII.
It wasin the fourth year of my apprenticeship to Joe, and it was a Saturday night.There was a group assembled round the fire at the Three Jolly Bargemen,attentive to Mr. Wopsle as he read the newspaper aloud. Of that group I wasone.
A highly popular murder had been committed, and Mr. Wopsle was imbrued in bloodto the eyebrows. He gloated over every abhorrent adjective in the description,and identified himself with every witness at the Inquest. He faintly moaned, "Iam done for," as the victim, and he barbarously bellowed, "I'll serve you out,"as the murderer. He gave the medical testimony, in pointed imitation of ourlocal practitioner; and he piped and shook, as the aged turnpike-keeper who hadheard blows, to an extent so very paralytic as to suggest a doubt regarding themental competency of that witness. The coroner, in Mr. Wopsle's hands, becameTimon of Athens; the beadle, Coriolanus. He enjoyed himself thoroughly, and weall enjoyed ourselves, and were delightfully comfortable. In this cosey stateof mind we came to the verdict Wilful Murder.
Then, and not sooner, I became aware of a strange gentleman leaning over theback of the settle opposite me, looking on. There was an expression of contempton his face, and he bit the side of a great forefinger as he watched the groupof faces.
"Well!" said the stranger to Mr. Wopsle, when the reading was done, "you havesettled it all to your own satisfaction, I have no doubt?"
Everybody started and looked up, as if it were the murderer. He looked ateverybody coldly and sarcastically.
"Guilty, of course?" said he. "Out with it. Come!"
"Sir," returned Mr. Wopsle, "without having the honour of your acquaintance, Ido say Guilty." Upon this we all took courage to unite in a confirmatorymurmur.
"I know you do," said the stranger; "I knew you would. I told you so. But nowI'll ask you a question. Do you know, or do you not know, that the law ofEngland supposes every man to be innocent, until he is proved—proved—to beguilty?"
"Sir," Mr. Wopsle began to reply, "as an Englishman myself, I—"
"Come!" said the stranger, biting his forefinger at him. "Don't evade thequestion. Either you know it, or you don't know it. Which is it to be?"
He stood with his head on one side and himself on one side, in a bullying,interrogative manner, and he threw his forefinger at Mr. Wopsle,—as it were tomark him out—before biting it again.
"Now!" said he. "Do you know it, or don't you know it?"
"Certainly I know it," replied Mr. Wopsle.
"Certainly you know it. Then why didn't you say so at first? Now, I'll ask youanother question,"—taking possession of Mr. Wopsle, as if he had a right tohim,—"do you know that none of these witnesses have yet beencross-examined?"
Mr. Wopsle was beginning, "I can only say—" when the stranger stopped him.
"What? You won't answer the question, yes or no? Now, I'll try you again."Throwing his finger at him again. "Attend to me. Are you aware, or are you notaware, that none of these witnesses have yet been cross-examined? Come, I onlywant one word from you. Yes, or no?"
Mr. Wopsle hesitated, and we all began to conceive rather a poor opinion ofhim.
"Come!" said the stranger, "I'll help you. You don't deserve help, but I'llhelp you. Look at that paper you hold in your hand. What is it?"
"What is it?" repeated Mr. Wopsle, eyeing it, much at a loss.
"Is it," pursued the stranger in his most sarcastic and suspicious manner, "theprinted paper you have just been reading from?"
"Undoubtedly."
"Undoubtedly. Now, turn to that paper, and tell me whether it distinctly statesthat the prisoner expressly said that his legal advisers instructed himaltogether to reserve his defence?"
"I read that just now," Mr. Wopsle pleaded.
"Never mind what you read just now, sir; I don't ask you what you read justnow. You may read the Lord's Prayer backwards, if you like,—and, perhaps, havedone it before to-day. Turn to the paper. No, no, no my friend; not to the topof the column; you know better than that; to the bottom, to the bottom." (Weall began to think Mr. Wopsle full of subterfuge.) "Well? Have you found it?"
"Here it is," said Mr. Wopsle.
"Now, follow that passage with your eye, and tell me whether it distinctlystates that the prisoner expressly said that he was instructed by his legaladvisers wholly to reserve his defence? Come! Do you make that of it?"
Mr. Wopsle answered, "Those are not the exact words."
"Not the exact words!" repeated the gentleman bitterly. "Is that the exactsubstance?"
"Yes," said Mr. Wopsle.
"Yes," repeated the stranger, looking round at the rest of the company with hisright hand extended towards the witness, Wopsle. "And now I ask you what yousay to the conscience of that man who, with that passage before his eyes, canlay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty,unheard?"
We all began to suspect that Mr. Wopsle was not the man we had thought him, andthat he was beginning to be found out.
"And that same man, remember," pursued the gentleman, throwing his finger atMr. Wopsle heavily,—"that same man might be summoned as a juryman upon thisvery trial, and, having thus deeply committed himself, might return to thebosom of his family and lay his head upon his pillow, after deliberatelyswearing that he would well and truly try the issue joined between OurSovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar, and would a true verdictgive according to the evidence, so help him God!"
We were all deeply persuaded that the unfortunate Wopsle had gone too far, andhad better stop in his reckless career while there was yet time.
The strange gentleman, with an air of authority not to be disputed, and with amanner expressive of knowing something secret about every one of us that wouldeffectually do for each individual if he chose to disclose it, left the back ofthe settle, and came into the space between the two settles, in front of thefire, where he remained standing, his left hand in his pocket, and he bitingthe forefinger of his right.
"From information I have received," said he, looking round at us as we allquailed before him, "I have reason to believe there is a blacksmith among you,by name Joseph—or Joe—Gargery. Which is the man?"
"Here is the man," said Joe.
The strange gentleman beckoned him out of his place, and Joe went.
"You have an apprentice," pursued the stranger, "commonly known as Pip? Is hehere?"
"I am here!" I cried.
The stranger did not recognise me, but I recognised him as the gentleman I hadmet on the stairs, on the occasion of my second visit to Miss Havisham. I hadknown him the moment I saw him looking over the settle, and now that I stoodconfronting him with his hand upon my shoulder, I checked off again in detailhis large head, his dark complexion, his deep-set eyes, his bushy blackeyebrows, his large watch-chain, his strong black dots of beard and whisker,and even the smell of scented soap on his great hand.
"I wish to have a private conference with you two," said he, when he hadsurveyed me at his leisure. "It will take a little time. Perhaps we had bettergo to your place of residence. I prefer not to anticipate my communicationhere; you will impart as much or as little of it as you please to your friendsafterwards; I have nothing to do with that."
Amidst a wondering silence, we three walked out of the Jolly Bargemen, and in awondering silence walked home. While going along, the strange gentlemanoccasionally looked at me, and occasionally bit the side of his finger. As weneared home, Joe vaguely acknowledging the occasion as an impressive andceremonious one, went on ahead to open the front door. Our conference was heldin the state parlour, which was feebly lighted by one candle.
It began with the strange gentleman's sitting down at the table, drawing thecandle to him, and looking over some entries in his pocket-book. He then put upthe pocket-book and set the candle a little aside, after peering round it intothe darkness at Joe and me, to ascertain which was which.
"My name," he said, "is Jaggers, and I am a lawyer in London. I am pretty wellknown. I have unusual business to transact with you, and I commence byexplaining that it is not of my originating. If my advice had been asked, Ishould not have been here. It was not asked, and you see me here. What I haveto do as the confidential agent of another, I do. No less, no more."
Finding that he could not see us very well from where he sat, he got up, andthrew one leg over the back of a chair and leaned upon it; thus having one footon the seat of the chair, and one foot on the ground.
"Now, Joseph Gargery, I am the bearer of an offer to relieve you of this youngfellow your apprentice. You would not object to cancel his indentures at hisrequest and for his good? You would want nothing for so doing?"
"Lord forbid that I should want anything for not standing in Pip's way," saidJoe, staring.
"Lord forbidding is pious, but not to the purpose," returned Mr. Jaggers. "Thequestion is, Would you want anything? Do you want anything?"
"The answer is," returned Joe, sternly, "No."
I thought Mr. Jaggers glanced at Joe, as if he considered him a fool for hisdisinterestedness. But I was too much bewildered between breathless curiosityand surprise, to be sure of it.
"Very well," said Mr. Jaggers. "Recollect the admission you have made, anddon't try to go from it presently."
"Who's a-going to try?" retorted Joe.
"I don't say anybody is. Do you keep a dog?"
"Yes, I do keep a dog."
"Bear in mind then, that Brag is a good dog, but Holdfast is a better. Bearthat in mind, will you?" repeated Mr. Jaggers, shutting his eyes and noddinghis head at Joe, as if he were forgiving him something. "Now, I return to thisyoung fellow. And the communication I have got to make is, that he has greatexpectations."
Joe and I gasped, and looked at one another.
"I am instructed to communicate to him," said Mr. Jaggers, throwing his fingerat me sideways, "that he will come into a handsome property. Further, that itis the desire of the present possessor of that property, that he be immediatelyremoved from his present sphere of life and from this place, and be brought upas a gentleman,—in a word, as a young fellow of great expectations."
My dream was out; my wild fancy was surpassed by sober reality; Miss Havishamwas going to make my fortune on a grand scale.
"Now, Mr. Pip," pursued the lawyer, "I address the rest of what I have to say,to you. You are to understand, first, that it is the request of the person fromwhom I take my instructions that you always bear the name of Pip. You will haveno objection, I dare say, to your great expectations being encumbered with thateasy condition. But if you have any objection, this is the time to mention it."
My heart was beating so fast, and there was such a singing in my ears, that Icould scarcely stammer I had no objection.
"I should think not! Now you are to understand, secondly, Mr. Pip, that thename of the person who is your liberal benefactor remains a profound secret,until the person chooses to reveal it. I am empowered to mention that it is theintention of the person to reveal it at first hand by word of mouth toyourself. When or where that intention may be carried out, I cannot say; no onecan say. It may be years hence. Now, you are distinctly to understand that youare most positively prohibited from making any inquiry on this head, or anyallusion or reference, however distant, to any individual whomsoever asthe individual, in all the communications you may have with me. If youhave a suspicion in your own breast, keep that suspicion in your own breast. Itis not the least to the purpose what the reasons of this prohibition are; theymay be the strongest and gravest reasons, or they may be mere whim. This is notfor you to inquire into. The condition is laid down. Your acceptance of it, andyour observance of it as binding, is the only remaining condition that I amcharged with, by the person from whom I take my instructions, and for whom I amnot otherwise responsible. That person is the person from whom you derive yourexpectations, and the secret is solely held by that person and by me. Again,not a very difficult condition with which to encumber such a rise in fortune;but if you have any objection to it, this is the time to mention it. Speakout."
Once more, I stammered with difficulty that I had no objection.
"I should think not! Now, Mr. Pip, I have done with stipulations." Though hecalled me Mr. Pip, and began rather to make up to me, he still could not getrid of a certain air of bullying suspicion; and even now he occasionally shuthis eyes and threw his finger at me while he spoke, as much as to express thathe knew all kinds of things to my disparagement, if he only chose to mentionthem. "We come next, to mere details of arrangement. You must know that,although I have used the term ‘expectations' more than once, you are notendowed with expectations only. There is already lodged in my hands a sum ofmoney amply sufficient for your suitable education and maintenance. You willplease consider me your guardian. Oh!" for I was going to thank him, "I tellyou at once, I am paid for my services, or I shouldn't render them. It isconsidered that you must be better educated, in accordance with your alteredposition, and that you will be alive to the importance and necessity of at onceentering on that advantage."
I said I had always longed for it.
"Never mind what you have always longed for, Mr. Pip," he retorted; "keep tothe record. If you long for it now, that's enough. Am I answered that you areready to be placed at once under some proper tutor? Is that it?"
I stammered yes, that was it.
"Good. Now, your inclinations are to be consulted. I don't think that wise,mind, but it's my trust. Have you ever heard of any tutor whom you would preferto another?"
I had never heard of any tutor but Biddy and Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt; so, Ireplied in the negative.
"There is a certain tutor, of whom I have some knowledge, who I think mightsuit the purpose," said Mr. Jaggers. "I don't recommend him, observe; because Inever recommend anybody. The gentleman I speak of is one Mr. Matthew Pocket."
Ah! I caught at the name directly. Miss Havisham's relation. The Matthew whomMr. and Mrs. Camilla had spoken of. The Matthew whose place was to be at MissHavisham's head, when she lay dead, in her bride's dress on the bride's table.
"You know the name?" said Mr. Jaggers, looking shrewdly at me, and thenshutting up his eyes while he waited for my answer.
My answer was, that I had heard of the name.
"Oh!" said he. "You have heard of the name. But the question is, what do yousay of it?"
I said, or tried to say, that I was much obliged to him for his recommendation—
"No, my young friend!" he interrupted, shaking his great head very slowly."Recollect yourself!"
Not recollecting myself, I began again that I was much obliged to him for hisrecommendation—
"No, my young friend," he interrupted, shaking his head and frowning andsmiling both at once,—"no, no, no; it's very well done, but it won't do; youare too young to fix me with it. Recommendation is not the word, Mr. Pip. Tryanother."
Correcting myself, I said that I was much obliged to him for his mention of Mr.Matthew Pocket—
"That's more like it!" cried Mr. Jaggers.—And (I added), I would gladlytry that gentleman.
"Good. You had better try him in his own house. The way shall be prepared foryou, and you can see his son first, who is in London. When will you come toLondon?"
I said (glancing at Joe, who stood looking on, motionless), that I supposed Icould come directly.
"First," said Mr. Jaggers, "you should have some new clothes to come in, andthey should not be working-clothes. Say this day week. You'll want some money.Shall I leave you twenty guineas?"
He produced a long purse, with the greatest coolness, and counted them out onthe table and pushed them over to me. This was the first time he had taken hisleg from the chair. He sat astride of the chair when he had pushed the moneyover, and sat swinging his purse and eyeing Joe.
"Well, Joseph Gargery? You look dumbfoundered?"
"I am!" said Joe, in a very decided manner.
"It was understood that you wanted nothing for yourself, remember?"
"It were understood," said Joe. "And it are understood. And it ever will besimilar according."
"But what," said Mr. Jaggers, swinging his purse,—"what if it was in myinstructions to make you a present, as compensation?"
"As compensation what for?" Joe demanded.
"For the loss of his services."
Joe laid his hand upon my shoulder with the touch of a woman. I have oftenthought him since, like the steam-hammer that can crush a man or pat anegg-shell, in his combination of strength with gentleness. "Pip is that heartywelcome," said Joe, "to go free with his services, to honour and fortun', as nowords can tell him. But if you think as Money can make compensation to me forthe loss of the little child—what come to the forge—and ever the best offriends!—"
O dear good Joe, whom I was so ready to leave and so unthankful to, I see youagain, with your muscular blacksmith's arm before your eyes, and your broadchest heaving, and your voice dying away. O dear good faithful tender Joe, Ifeel the loving tremble of your hand upon my arm, as solemnly this day as if ithad been the rustle of an angel's wing!
But I encouraged Joe at the time. I was lost in the mazes of my futurefortunes, and could not retrace the by-paths we had trodden together. I beggedJoe to be comforted, for (as he said) we had ever been the best of friends, and(as I said) we ever would be so. Joe scooped his eyes with his disengagedwrist, as if he were bent on gouging himself, but said not another word.
Mr. Jaggers had looked on at this, as one who recognised in Joe the villageidiot, and in me his keeper. When it was over, he said, weighing in his handthe purse he had ceased to swing:—
"Now, Joseph Gargery, I warn you this is your last chance. No half measureswith me. If you mean to take a present that I have it in charge to make you,speak out, and you shall have it. If on the contrary you mean to say—" Here, tohis great amazement, he was stopped by Joe's suddenly working round him withevery demonstration of a fell pugilistic purpose.
"Which I meantersay," cried Joe, "that if you come into my place bull-baitingand badgering me, come out! Which I meantersay as sech if you're a man, comeon! Which I meantersay that what I say, I meantersay and stand or fall by!"
I drew Joe away, and he immediately became placable; merely stating to me, inan obliging manner and as a polite expostulatory notice to any one whom itmight happen to concern, that he were not a-going to be bull-baited andbadgered in his own place. Mr. Jaggers had risen when Joe demonstrated, and hadbacked near the door. Without evincing any inclination to come in again, hethere delivered his valedictory remarks. They were these.
"Well, Mr. Pip, I think the sooner you leave here—as you are to be agentleman—the better. Let it stand for this day week, and you shall receive myprinted address in the meantime. You can take a hackney-coach at thestage-coach office in London, and come straight to me. Understand, that Iexpress no opinion, one way or other, on the trust I undertake. I am paid forundertaking it, and I do so. Now, understand that, finally. Understand that!"
He was throwing his finger at both of us, and I think would have gone on, butfor his seeming to think Joe dangerous, and going off.
Something came into my head which induced me to run after him, as he was goingdown to the Jolly Bargemen, where he had left a hired carriage.
"I beg your pardon, Mr. Jaggers."
"Halloa!" said he, facing round, "what's the matter?"
"I wish to be quite right, Mr. Jaggers, and to keep to your directions; so Ithought I had better ask. Would there be any objection to my taking leave ofany one I know, about here, before I go away?"
"No," said he, looking as if he hardly understood me.
"I don't mean in the village only, but up town?"
"No," said he. "No objection."
I thanked him and ran home again, and there I found that Joe had already lockedthe front door and vacated the state parlour, and was seated by the kitchenfire with a hand on each knee, gazing intently at the burning coals. I too satdown before the fire and gazed at the coals, and nothing was said for a longtime.
My sister was in her cushioned chair in her corner, and Biddy sat at herneedle-work before the fire, and Joe sat next Biddy, and I sat next Joe in thecorner opposite my sister. The more I looked into the glowing coals, the moreincapable I became of looking at Joe; the longer the silence lasted, the moreunable I felt to speak.
At length I got out, "Joe, have you told Biddy?"
"No, Pip," returned Joe, still looking at the fire, and holding his kneestight, as if he had private information that they intended to make offsomewhere, "which I left it to yourself, Pip."
"I would rather you told, Joe."
"Pip's a gentleman of fortun' then," said Joe, "and God bless him in it!"
Biddy dropped her work, and looked at me. Joe held his knees and looked at me.I looked at both of them. After a pause, they both heartily congratulated me;but there was a certain touch of sadness in their congratulations that I ratherresented.
I took it upon myself to impress Biddy (and through Biddy, Joe) with the graveobligation I considered my friends under, to know nothing and say nothing aboutthe maker of my fortune. It would all come out in good time, I observed, and inthe meanwhile nothing was to be said, save that I had come into greatexpectations from a mysterious patron. Biddy nodded her head thoughtfully atthe fire as she took up her work again, and said she would be very particular;and Joe, still detaining his knees, said, "Ay, ay, I'll be ekervallypartickler, Pip;" and then they congratulated me again, and went on to expressso much wonder at the notion of my being a gentleman that I didn't half likeit.
Infinite pains were then taken by Biddy to convey to my sister some idea ofwhat had happened. To the best of my belief, those efforts entirely failed. Shelaughed and nodded her head a great many times, and even repeated after Biddy,the words "Pip" and "Property." But I doubt if they had more meaning in themthan an election cry, and I cannot suggest a darker picture of her state ofmind.
I never could have believed it without experience, but as Joe and Biddy becamemore at their cheerful ease again, I became quite gloomy. Dissatisfied with myfortune, of course I could not be; but it is possible that I may have been,without quite knowing it, dissatisfied with myself.
Anyhow, I sat with my elbow on my knee and my face upon my hand, looking intothe fire, as those two talked about my going away, and about what they shoulddo without me, and all that. And whenever I caught one of them looking at me,though never so pleasantly (and they often looked at me,—particularly Biddy), Ifelt offended: as if they were expressing some mistrust of me. Though Heavenknows they never did by word or sign.
At those times I would get up and look out at the door; for our kitchen dooropened at once upon the night, and stood open on summer evenings to air theroom. The very stars to which I then raised my eyes, I am afraid I took to bebut poor and humble stars for glittering on the rustic objects among which Ihad passed my life.
"Saturday night," said I, when we sat at our supper of bread and cheese andbeer. "Five more days, and then the day before the day! They'll soongo."
"Yes, Pip," observed Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug. "They'llsoon go."
"Soon, soon go," said Biddy.
"I have been thinking, Joe, that when I go down town on Monday, and order mynew clothes, I shall tell the tailor that I'll come and put them on there, orthat I'll have them sent to Mr. Pumblechook's. It would be very disagreeable tobe stared at by all the people here."
"Mr. and Mrs. Hubble might like to see you in your new gen-teel figure too,Pip," said Joe, industriously cutting his bread, with his cheese on it, in thepalm of his left hand, and glancing at my untasted supper as if he thought ofthe time when we used to compare slices. "So might Wopsle. And the JollyBargemen might take it as a compliment."
"That's just what I don't want, Joe. They would make such a business ofit,—such a coarse and common business,—that I couldn't bear myself."
"Ah, that indeed, Pip!" said Joe. "If you couldn't abear yourself—"
Biddy asked me here, as she sat holding my sister's plate, "Have you thoughtabout when you'll show yourself to Mr. Gargery, and your sister and me? Youwill show yourself to us; won't you?"
"Biddy," I returned with some resentment, "you are so exceedingly quick thatit's difficult to keep up with you."
("She always were quick," observed Joe.)
"If you had waited another moment, Biddy, you would have heard me say that Ishall bring my clothes here in a bundle one evening,—most likely on the eveningbefore I go away."
Biddy said no more. Handsomely forgiving her, I soon exchanged an affectionategood night with her and Joe, and went up to bed. When I got into my littleroom, I sat down and took a long look at it, as a mean little room that Ishould soon be parted from and raised above, for ever. It was furnished withfresh young remembrances too, and even at the same moment I fell into much thesame confused division of mind between it and the better rooms to which I wasgoing, as I had been in so often between the forge and Miss Havisham's, andBiddy and Estella.
The sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of my attic, and the roomwas warm. As I put the window open and stood looking out, I saw Joe come slowlyforth at the dark door, below, and take a turn or two in the air; and then Isaw Biddy come, and bring him a pipe and light it for him. He never smoked solate, and it seemed to hint to me that he wanted comforting, for some reason orother.
He presently stood at the door immediately beneath me, smoking his pipe, andBiddy stood there too, quietly talking to him, and I knew that they talked ofme, for I heard my name mentioned in an endearing tone by both of them morethan once. I would not have listened for more, if I could have heard more; so Idrew away from the window, and sat down in my one chair by the bedside, feelingit very sorrowful and strange that this first night of my bright fortunesshould be the loneliest I had ever known.
Looking towards the open window, I saw light wreaths from Joe's pipe floatingthere, and I fancied it was like a blessing from Joe,—not obtruded on me orparaded before me, but pervading the air we shared together. I put my lightout, and crept into bed; and it was an uneasy bed now, and I never slept theold sound sleep in it any more.
