
Chapter XIX.
Morning made a considerable difference in my general prospect ofLife, and brightened it so much that it scarcely seemed the same. What layheaviest on my mind was, the consideration that six days intervened between meand the day of departure; for I could not divest myself of a misgiving thatsomething might happen to London in the meanwhile, and that, when I got there,it would be either greatly deteriorated or clean gone.
Joe and Biddy were very sympathetic and pleasant when I spoke of ourapproaching separation; but they only referred to it when I did. Afterbreakfast, Joe brought out my indentures from the press in the best parlour,and we put them in the fire, and I felt that I was free. With all the noveltyof my emancipation on me, I went to church with Joe, and thought perhaps theclergyman wouldn't have read that about the rich man and the kingdom of Heaven,if he had known all.
After our early dinner, I strolled out alone, purposing to finish off themarshes at once, and get them done with. As I passed the church, I felt (as Ihad felt during service in the morning) a sublime compassion for the poorcreatures who were destined to go there, Sunday after Sunday, all their livesthrough, and to lie obscurely at last among the low green mounds. I promisedmyself that I would do something for them one of these days, and formed a planin outline for bestowing a dinner of roast-beef and plum-pudding, a pint ofale, and a gallon of condescension, upon everybody in the village.
If I had often thought before, with something allied to shame, of mycompanionship with the fugitive whom I had once seen limping among thosegraves, what were my thoughts on this Sunday, when the place recalled thewretch, ragged and shivering, with his felon iron and badge! My comfort was,that it happened a long time ago, and that he had doubtless been transported along way off, and that he was dead to me, and might be veritably dead into thebargain.
No more low, wet grounds, no more dikes and sluices, no more of these grazingcattle,—though they seemed, in their dull manner, to wear a more respectful airnow, and to face round, in order that they might stare as long as possible atthe possessor of such great expectations,—farewell, monotonous acquaintances ofmy childhood, henceforth I was for London and greatness; not for smith's workin general, and for you! I made my exultant way to the old Battery, and, lyingdown there to consider the question whether Miss Havisham intended me forEstella, fell asleep.
When I awoke, I was much surprised to find Joe sitting beside me, smoking hispipe. He greeted me with a cheerful smile on my opening my eyes, and said,—
"As being the last time, Pip, I thought I'd foller."
"And Joe, I am very glad you did so."
"Thankee, Pip."
"You may be sure, dear Joe," I went on, after we had shaken hands, "that Ishall never forget you."
"No, no, Pip!" said Joe, in a comfortable tone, "I'm sure of that. Ay,ay, old chap! Bless you, it were only necessary to get it well round in a man'smind, to be certain on it. But it took a bit of time to get it well round, thechange come so oncommon plump; didn't it?"
Somehow, I was not best pleased with Joe's being so mightily secure of me. Ishould have liked him to have betrayed emotion, or to have said, "It does youcredit, Pip," or something of that sort. Therefore, I made no remark on Joe'sfirst head; merely saying as to his second, that the tidings had indeed comesuddenly, but that I had always wanted to be a gentleman, and had often andoften speculated on what I would do, if I were one.
"Have you though?" said Joe. "Astonishing!"
"It's a pity now, Joe," said I, "that you did not get on a little more, when wehad our lessons here; isn't it?"
"Well, I don't know," returned Joe. "I'm so awful dull. I'm only master of myown trade. It were always a pity as I was so awful dull; but it's no more of apity now, than it was—this day twelvemonth—don't you see?"
What I had meant was, that when I came into my property and was able to dosomething for Joe, it would have been much more agreeable if he had been betterqualified for a rise in station. He was so perfectly innocent of my meaning,however, that I thought I would mention it to Biddy in preference.
So, when we had walked home and had had tea, I took Biddy into our littlegarden by the side of the lane, and, after throwing out in a general way forthe elevation of her spirits, that I should never forget her, said I had afavour to ask of her.
"And it is, Biddy," said I, "that you will not omit any opportunity of helpingJoe on, a little."
"How helping him on?" asked Biddy, with a steady sort of glance.
"Well! Joe is a dear good fellow,—in fact, I think he is the dearest fellowthat ever lived,—but he is rather backward in some things. For instance, Biddy,in his learning and his manners."
Although I was looking at Biddy as I spoke, and although she opened her eyesvery wide when I had spoken, she did not look at me.
"O, his manners! won't his manners do then?" asked Biddy, plucking ablack-currant leaf.
"My dear Biddy, they do very well here—"
"O! they do very well here?" interrupted Biddy, looking closely at theleaf in her hand.
"Hear me out,—but if I were to remove Joe into a higher sphere, as I shall hopeto remove him when I fully come into my property, they would hardly do himjustice."
"And don't you think he knows that?" asked Biddy.
It was such a very provoking question (for it had never in the most distantmanner occurred to me), that I said, snappishly,—
"Biddy, what do you mean?"
Biddy, having rubbed the leaf to pieces between her hands,—and the smell of ablack-currant bush has ever since recalled to me that evening in the littlegarden by the side of the lane,—said, "Have you never considered that he may beproud?"
"Proud?" I repeated, with disdainful emphasis.
"O! there are many kinds of pride," said Biddy, looking full at me and shakingher head; "pride is not all of one kind—"
"Well? What are you stopping for?" said I.
"Not all of one kind," resumed Biddy. "He may be too proud to let any one takehim out of a place that he is competent to fill, and fills well and withrespect. To tell you the truth, I think he is; though it sounds bold in me tosay so, for you must know him far better than I do."
"Now, Biddy," said I, "I am very sorry to see this in you. I did not expect tosee this in you. You are envious, Biddy, and grudging. You are dissatisfied onaccount of my rise in fortune, and you can't help showing it."
"If you have the heart to think so," returned Biddy, "say so. Say so over andover again, if you have the heart to think so."
"If you have the heart to be so, you mean, Biddy," said I, in a virtuous andsuperior tone; "don't put it off upon me. I am very sorry to see it, and it'sa—it's a bad side of human nature. I did intend to ask you to use any littleopportunities you might have after I was gone, of improving dear Joe. But afterthis I ask you nothing. I am extremely sorry to see this in you, Biddy," Irepeated. "It's a—it's a bad side of human nature."
"Whether you scold me or approve of me," returned poor Biddy, "you may equallydepend upon my trying to do all that lies in my power, here, at all times. Andwhatever opinion you take away of me, shall make no difference in myremembrance of you. Yet a gentleman should not be unjust neither," said Biddy,turning away her head.
I again warmly repeated that it was a bad side of human nature (in whichsentiment, waiving its application, I have since seen reason to think I wasright), and I walked down the little path away from Biddy, and Biddy went intothe house, and I went out at the garden gate and took a dejected stroll untilsupper-time; again feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this, the secondnight of my bright fortunes, should be as lonely and unsatisfactory as thefirst.
But, morning once more brightened my view, and I extended my clemency to Biddy,and we dropped the subject. Putting on the best clothes I had, I went into townas early as I could hope to find the shops open, and presented myself beforeMr. Trabb, the tailor, who was having his breakfast in the parlour behind hisshop, and who did not think it worth his while to come out to me, but called mein to him.
"Well!" said Mr. Trabb, in a hail-fellow-well-met kind of way. "How are you,and what can I do for you?"
Mr. Trabb had sliced his hot roll into three feather-beds, and was slippingbutter in between the blankets, and covering it up. He was a prosperous oldbachelor, and his open window looked into a prosperous little garden andorchard, and there was a prosperous iron safe let into the wall at the side ofhis fireplace, and I did not doubt that heaps of his prosperity were put awayin it in bags.
"Mr. Trabb," said I, "it's an unpleasant thing to have to mention, because itlooks like boasting; but I have come into a handsome property."
A change passed over Mr. Trabb. He forgot the butter in bed, got up from thebedside, and wiped his fingers on the tablecloth, exclaiming, "Lord bless mysoul!"
"I am going up to my guardian in London," said I, casually drawing some guineasout of my pocket and looking at them; "and I want a fashionable suit of clothesto go in. I wish to pay for them," I added—otherwise I thought he might onlypretend to make them, "with ready money."
"My dear sir," said Mr. Trabb, as he respectfully bent his body, opened hisarms, and took the liberty of touching me on the outside of each elbow, "don'thurt me by mentioning that. May I venture to congratulate you? Would you do methe favour of stepping into the shop?"
Mr. Trabb's boy was the most audacious boy in all that country-side. When I hadentered he was sweeping the shop, and he had sweetened his labours by sweepingover me. He was still sweeping when I came out into the shop with Mr. Trabb,and he knocked the broom against all possible corners and obstacles, to express(as I understood it) equality with any blacksmith, alive or dead.
"Hold that noise," said Mr. Trabb, with the greatest sternness, "or I'll knockyour head off!—Do me the favour to be seated, sir. Now, this," said Mr. Trabb,taking down a roll of cloth, and tiding it out in a flowing manner over thecounter, preparatory to getting his hand under it to show the gloss, "is a verysweet article. I can recommend it for your purpose, sir, because it really isextra super. But you shall see some others. Give me Number Four, you!" (To theboy, and with a dreadfully severe stare; foreseeing the danger of thatmiscreant's brushing me with it, or making some other sign of familiarity.)
Mr. Trabb never removed his stern eye from the boy until he had depositednumber four on the counter and was at a safe distance again. Then he commandedhim to bring number five, and number eight. "And let me have none of yourtricks here," said Mr. Trabb, "or you shall repent it, you young scoundrel, thelongest day you have to live."
Mr. Trabb then bent over number four, and in a sort of deferential confidencerecommended it to me as a light article for summer wear, an article much invogue among the nobility and gentry, an article that it would ever be an honourto him to reflect upon a distinguished fellow-townsman's (if he might claim mefor a fellow-townsman) having worn. "Are you bringing numbers five and eight,you vagabond," said Mr. Trabb to the boy after that, "or shall I kick you outof the shop and bring them myself?"
I selected the materials for a suit, with the assistance of Mr. Trabb'sjudgment, and re-entered the parlour to be measured. For although Mr. Trabb hadmy measure already, and had previously been quite contented with it, he saidapologetically that it "wouldn't do under existing circumstances, sir,—wouldn'tdo at all." So, Mr. Trabb measured and calculated me in the parlour, as if Iwere an estate and he the finest species of surveyor, and gave himself such aworld of trouble that I felt that no suit of clothes could possibly remuneratehim for his pains. When he had at last done and had appointed to send thearticles to Mr. Pumblechook's on the Thursday evening, he said, with his handupon the parlour lock, "I know, sir, that London gentlemen cannot be expectedto patronise local work, as a rule; but if you would give me a turn now andthen in the quality of a townsman, I should greatly esteem it. Good-morning,sir, much obliged.—Door!"
The last word was flung at the boy, who had not the least notion what it meant.But I saw him collapse as his master rubbed me out with his hands, and my firstdecided experience of the stupendous power of money was, that it had morallylaid upon his back Trabb's boy.
After this memorable event, I went to the hatter's, and the bootmaker's, andthe hosier's, and felt rather like Mother Hubbard's dog whose outfit requiredthe services of so many trades. I also went to the coach-office and took myplace for seven o'clock on Saturday morning. It was not necessary to explaineverywhere that I had come into a handsome property; but whenever I saidanything to that effect, it followed that the officiating tradesman ceased tohave his attention diverted through the window by the High Street, andconcentrated his mind upon me. When I had ordered everything I wanted, Idirected my steps towards Pumblechook's, and, as I approached that gentleman'splace of business, I saw him standing at his door.
He was waiting for me with great impatience. He had been out early with thechaise-cart, and had called at the forge and heard the news. He had prepared acollation for me in the Barnwell parlour, and he too ordered his shopman to"come out of the gangway" as my sacred person passed.
"My dear friend," said Mr. Pumblechook, taking me by both hands, when he and Iand the collation were alone, "I give you joy of your good fortune. Welldeserved, well deserved!"
This was coming to the point, and I thought it a sensible way of expressinghimself.
"To think," said Mr. Pumblechook, after snorting admiration at me for somemoments, "that I should have been the humble instrument of leading up to this,is a proud reward."
I begged Mr. Pumblechook to remember that nothing was to be ever said orhinted, on that point.
"My dear young friend," said Mr. Pumblechook; "if you will allow me to call youso—"
I murmured "Certainly," and Mr. Pumblechook took me by both hands again, andcommunicated a movement to his waistcoat, which had an emotional appearance,though it was rather low down, "My dear young friend, rely upon my doing mylittle all in your absence, by keeping the fact before the mind ofJoseph.—Joseph!" said Mr. Pumblechook, in the way of a compassionateadjuration. "Joseph!! Joseph!!!" Thereupon he shook his head and tapped it,expressing his sense of deficiency in Joseph.
"But my dear young friend," said Mr. Pumblechook, "you must be hungry, you mustbe exhausted. Be seated. Here is a chicken had round from the Boar, here is atongue had round from the Boar, here's one or two little things had round fromthe Boar, that I hope you may not despise. But do I," said Mr. Pumblechook,getting up again the moment after he had sat down, "see afore me, him as I eversported with in his times of happy infancy? And may I—may I—?"
This May I, meant might he shake hands? I consented, and he was fervent, andthen sat down again.
"Here is wine," said Mr. Pumblechook. "Let us drink, Thanks to Fortune, and mayshe ever pick out her favourites with equal judgment! And yet I cannot," saidMr. Pumblechook, getting up again, "see afore me One—and likewise drink toOne—without again expressing—May I—may I—?"
I said he might, and he shook hands with me again, and emptied his glass andturned it upside down. I did the same; and if I had turned myself upside downbefore drinking, the wine could not have gone more direct to my head.
Mr. Pumblechook helped me to the liver wing, and to the best slice of tongue(none of those out-of-the-way No Thoroughfares of Pork now), and took,comparatively speaking, no care of himself at all. "Ah! poultry, poultry! Youlittle thought," said Mr. Pumblechook, apostrophising the fowl in the dish,"when you was a young fledgling, what was in store for you. You little thoughtyou was to be refreshment beneath this humble roof for one as—Call it aweakness, if you will," said Mr. Pumblechook, getting up again, "but may I?may I—?"
It began to be unnecessary to repeat the form of saying he might, so he did itat once. How he ever did it so often without wounding himself with my knife, Idon't know.
"And your sister," he resumed, after a little steady eating, "which had thehonour of bringing you up by hand! It's a sad picter, to reflect that she's nolonger equal to fully understanding the honour. May—"
I saw he was about to come at me again, and I stopped him.
"We'll drink her health," said I.
"Ah!" cried Mr. Pumblechook, leaning back in his chair, quite flaccid withadmiration, "that's the way you know 'em, sir!" (I don't know who Sir was, buthe certainly was not I, and there was no third person present); "that's the wayyou know the noble-minded, sir! Ever forgiving and ever affable. It might,"said the servile Pumblechook, putting down his untasted glass in a hurry andgetting up again, "to a common person, have the appearance of repeating—butmay I—?"
When he had done it, he resumed his seat and drank to my sister. "Let us neverbe blind," said Mr. Pumblechook, "to her faults of temper, but it is to behoped she meant well."
At about this time, I began to observe that he was getting flushed in the face;as to myself, I felt all face, steeped in wine and smarting.
I mentioned to Mr. Pumblechook that I wished to have my new clothes sent to hishouse, and he was ecstatic on my so distinguishing him. I mentioned my reasonfor desiring to avoid observation in the village, and he lauded it to theskies. There was nobody but himself, he intimated, worthy of my confidence,and—in short, might he? Then he asked me tenderly if I remembered our boyishgames at sums, and how we had gone together to have me bound apprentice, and,in effect, how he had ever been my favourite fancy and my chosen friend? If Ihad taken ten times as many glasses of wine as I had, I should have known thathe never had stood in that relation towards me, and should in my heart ofhearts have repudiated the idea. Yet for all that, I remember feeling convincedthat I had been much mistaken in him, and that he was a sensible, practical,good-hearted prime fellow.
By degrees he fell to reposing such great confidence in me, as to ask my advicein reference to his own affairs. He mentioned that there was an opportunity fora great amalgamation and monopoly of the corn and seed trade on those premises,if enlarged, such as had never occurred before in that or any otherneighbourhood. What alone was wanting to the realisation of a vast fortune, heconsidered to be More Capital. Those were the two little words, more capital.Now it appeared to him (Pumblechook) that if that capital were got into thebusiness, through a sleeping partner, sir,—which sleeping partner would havenothing to do but walk in, by self or deputy, whenever he pleased, and examinethe books,—and walk in twice a year and take his profits away in his pocket, tothe tune of fifty per cent,—it appeared to him that that might be an openingfor a young gentleman of spirit combined with property, which would be worthyof his attention. But what did I think? He had great confidence in my opinion,and what did I think? I gave it as my opinion. "Wait a bit!" The unitedvastness and distinctness of this view so struck him, that he no longer askedif he might shake hands with me, but said he really must,—and did.
We drank all the wine, and Mr. Pumblechook pledged himself over and over againto keep Joseph up to the mark (I don't know what mark), and to render meefficient and constant service (I don't know what service). He also made knownto me for the first time in my life, and certainly after having kept his secretwonderfully well, that he had always said of me, "That boy is no common boy,and mark me, his fortun' will be no common fortun'." He said with a tearfulsmile that it was a singular thing to think of now, and I said so too. Finally,I went out into the air, with a dim perception that there was somethingunwonted in the conduct of the sunshine, and found that I had slumberously gotto the turnpike without having taken any account of the road.
There, I was roused by Mr. Pumblechook's hailing me. He was a long way down thesunny street, and was making expressive gestures for me to stop. I stopped, andhe came up breathless.
"No, my dear friend," said he, when he had recovered wind for speech. "Not if Ican help it. This occasion shall not entirely pass without that affability onyour part.—May I, as an old friend and well-wisher? May I?"
We shook hands for the hundredth time at least, and he ordered a young carterout of my way with the greatest indignation. Then, he blessed me and stoodwaving his hand to me until I had passed the crook in the road; and then Iturned into a field and had a long nap under a hedge before I pursued my wayhome.
I had scant luggage to take with me to London, for little of the little Ipossessed was adapted to my new station. But I began packing that sameafternoon, and wildly packed up things that I knew I should want next morning,in a fiction that there was not a moment to be lost.
So, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, passed; and on Friday morning I went toMr. Pumblechook's, to put on my new clothes and pay my visit to Miss Havisham.Mr. Pumblechook's own room was given up to me to dress in, and was decoratedwith clean towels expressly for the event. My clothes were rather adisappointment, of course. Probably every new and eagerly expected garment everput on since clothes came in, fell a trifle short of the wearer's expectation.But after I had had my new suit on some half an hour, and had gone through animmensity of posturing with Mr. Pumblechook's very limited dressing-glass, inthe futile endeavour to see my legs, it seemed to fit me better. It beingmarket morning at a neighbouring town some ten miles off, Mr. Pumblechook wasnot at home. I had not told him exactly when I meant to leave, and was notlikely to shake hands with him again before departing. This was all as itshould be, and I went out in my new array, fearfully ashamed of having to passthe shopman, and suspicious after all that I was at a personal disadvantage,something like Joe's in his Sunday suit.
I went circuitously to Miss Havisham's by all the back ways, and rang at thebell constrainedly, on account of the stiff long fingers of my gloves. SarahPocket came to the gate, and positively reeled back when she saw me so changed;her walnut-shell countenance likewise turned from brown to green and yellow.
"You?" said she. "You? Good gracious! What do you want?"
"I am going to London, Miss Pocket," said I, "and want to say good-bye to MissHavisham."
I was not expected, for she left me locked in the yard, while she went to askif I were to be admitted. After a very short delay, she returned and took meup, staring at me all the way.
Miss Havisham was taking exercise in the room with the long spread table,leaning on her crutch stick. The room was lighted as of yore, and at the soundof our entrance, she stopped and turned. She was then just abreast of therotted bride-cake.
"Don't go, Sarah," she said. "Well, Pip?"
"I start for London, Miss Havisham, to-morrow," I was exceedingly careful whatI said, "and I thought you would kindly not mind my taking leave of you."
"This is a gay figure, Pip," said she, making her crutch stick play round me,as if she, the fairy godmother who had changed me, were bestowing the finishinggift.
"I have come into such good fortune since I saw you last, Miss Havisham," Imurmured. "And I am so grateful for it, Miss Havisham!"
"Ay, ay!" said she, looking at the discomfited and envious Sarah, with delight."I have seen Mr. Jaggers. I have heard about it, Pip. So you goto-morrow?"
"Yes, Miss Havisham."
"And you are adopted by a rich person?"
"Yes, Miss Havisham."
"Not named?"
"No, Miss Havisham."
"And Mr. Jaggers is made your guardian?"
"Yes, Miss Havisham."
She quite gloated on these questions and answers, so keen was her enjoyment ofSarah Pocket's jealous dismay. "Well!" she went on; "you have a promisingcareer before you. Be good—deserve it—and abide by Mr. Jaggers's instructions."She looked at me, and looked at Sarah, and Sarah's countenance wrung out of herwatchful face a cruel smile. "Good-bye, Pip!—you will always keep the name ofPip, you know."
"Yes, Miss Havisham."
"Good-bye, Pip!"
She stretched out her hand, and I went down on my knee and put it to my lips. Ihad not considered how I should take leave of her; it came naturally to me atthe moment to do this. She looked at Sarah Pocket with triumph in her weirdeyes, and so I left my fairy godmother, with both her hands on her crutchstick, standing in the midst of the dimly lighted room beside the rottenbride-cake that was hidden in cobwebs.
Sarah Pocket conducted me down, as if I were a ghost who must be seen out. Shecould not get over my appearance, and was in the last degree confounded. I said"Good-bye, Miss Pocket;" but she merely stared, and did not seem collectedenough to know that I had spoken. Clear of the house, I made the best of my wayback to Pumblechook's, took off my new clothes, made them into a bundle, andwent back home in my older dress, carrying it—to speak the truth—much more atmy ease too, though I had the bundle to carry.
And now, those six days which were to have run out so slowly, had run out fastand were gone, and to-morrow looked me in the face more steadily than I couldlook at it. As the six evenings had dwindled away, to five, to four, to three,to two, I had become more and more appreciative of the society of Joe andBiddy. On this last evening, I dressed myself out in my new clothes for theirdelight, and sat in my splendour	 until bedtime. We had a hot supper on theoccasion, graced by the inevitable roast fowl, and we had some flip to finishwith. We were all very low, and none the higher for pretending to be inspirits.
I was to leave our village at five in the morning, carrying my littlehand-portmanteau, and I had told Joe that I wished to walk away all alone. I amafraid—sore afraid—that this purpose originated in my sense of the contrastthere would be between me and Joe, if we went to the coach together. I hadpretended with myself that there was nothing of this taint in the arrangement;but when I went up to my little room on this last night, I felt compelled toadmit that it might be so, and had an impulse upon me to go down again andentreat Joe to walk with me in the morning. I did not.
All night there were coaches in my broken sleep, going to wrong places insteadof to London, and having in the traces, now dogs, now cats, now pigs, nowmen,—never horses. Fantastic failures of journeys occupied me until the daydawned and the birds were singing. Then, I got up and partly dressed, and satat the window to take a last look out, and in taking it fell asleep.
Biddy was astir so early to get my breakfast, that, although I did not sleep atthe window an hour, I smelt the smoke of the kitchen fire when I started upwith a terrible idea that it must be late in the afternoon. But long afterthat, and long after I had heard the clinking of the teacups and was quiteready, I wanted the resolution to go downstairs. After all, I remained upthere, repeatedly unlocking and unstrapping my small portmanteau and lockingand strapping it up again, until Biddy called to me that I was late.
It was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it. I got up from the meal, sayingwith a sort of briskness, as if it had only just occurred to me, "Well! Isuppose I must be off!" and then I kissed my sister who was laughing andnodding and shaking in her usual chair, and kissed Biddy, and threw my armsaround Joe's neck. Then I took up my little portmanteau and walked out. Thelast I saw of them was, when I presently heard a scuffle behind me, and lookingback, saw Joe throwing an old shoe after me and Biddy throwing another oldshoe. I stopped then, to wave my hat, and dear old Joe waved his strong rightarm above his head, crying huskily "Hooroar!" and Biddy put her apron to herface.
I walked away at a good pace, thinking it was easier to go than I had supposedit would be, and reflecting that it would never have done to have had an oldshoe thrown after the coach, in sight of all the High Street. I whistled andmade nothing of going. But the village was very peaceful and quiet, and thelight mists were solemnly rising, as if to show me the world, and I had been soinnocent and little there, and all beyond was so unknown and great, that in amoment with a strong heave and sob I broke into tears. It was by thefinger-post at the end of the village, and I laid my hand upon it, and said,"Good-bye, O my dear, dear friend!"
Heaven knows we need never be ashamed of our tears, for they are rain upon theblinding dust of earth, overlying our hard hearts. I was better after I hadcried than before,—more sorry, more aware of my own ingratitude, more gentle.If I had cried before, I should have had Joe with me then.
So subdued I was by those tears, and by their breaking out again in the courseof the quiet walk, that when I was on the coach, and it was clear of the town,I deliberated with an aching heart whether I would not get down when we changedhorses and walk back, and have another evening at home, and a better parting.We changed, and I had not made up my mind, and still reflected for my comfortthat it would be quite practicable to get down and walk back, when we changedagain. And while I was occupied with these deliberations, I would fancy anexact resemblance to Joe in some man coming along the road towards us, and myheart would beat high.—As if he could possibly be there!
We changed again, and yet again, and it was now too late and too far to goback, and I went on. And the mists had all solemnly risen now, and the worldlay spread before me.
 This is the end of the first stage of Pip's expectations. 
