
Chapter II.
Mysister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was more than twenty years older than I, and hadestablished a great reputation with herself and the neighbours because she hadbrought me up "by hand." Having at that time to find out for myself what theexpression meant, and knowing her to have a hard and heavy hand, and to be muchin the habit of laying it upon her husband as well as upon me, I supposed thatJoe Gargery and I were both brought up by hand.
She was not a good-looking woman, my sister; and I had a general impressionthat she must have made Joe Gargery marry her by hand. Joe was a fair man, withcurls of flaxen hair on each side of his smooth face, and with eyes of such avery undecided blue that they seemed to have somehow got mixed with their ownwhites. He was a mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dearfellow,—a sort of Hercules in strength, and also in weakness.
My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes, had such a prevailing redness ofskin that I sometimes used to wonder whether it was possible she washed herselfwith a nutmeg-grater instead of soap. She was tall and bony, and almost alwayswore a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and havinga square impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles. Shemade it a powerful merit in herself, and a strong reproach against Joe, thatshe wore this apron so much. Though I really see no reason why she should haveworn it at all; or why, if she did wear it at all, she should not have taken itoff, every day of her life.
Joe's forge adjoined our house, which was a wooden house, as many of thedwellings in our country were,—most of them, at that time. When I ran home fromthe churchyard, the forge was shut up, and Joe was sitting alone in thekitchen. Joe and I being fellow-sufferers, and having confidences as such, Joeimparted a confidence to me, the moment I raised the latch of the door andpeeped in at him opposite to it, sitting in the chimney corner.
"Mrs. Joe has been out a dozen times, looking for you, Pip. And she's out now,making it a baker's dozen."
"Is she?"
"Yes, Pip," said Joe; "and what's worse, she's got Tickler with her."
At this dismal intelligence, I twisted the only button on my waistcoat roundand round, and looked in great depression at the fire. Tickler was a wax-endedpiece of cane, worn smooth by collision with my tickled frame.
"She sot down," said Joe, "and she got up, and she made a grab at Tickler, andshe Ram-paged out. That's what she did," said Joe, slowly clearing the firebetween the lower bars with the poker, and looking at it; "she Ram-paged out,Pip."
"Has she been gone long, Joe?" I always treated him as a larger species ofchild, and as no more than my equal.
"Well," said Joe, glancing up at the Dutch clock, "she's been on the Ram-page,this last spell, about five minutes, Pip. She's a-coming! Get behind the door,old chap, and have the jack-towel betwixt you."
I took the advice. My sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing the door wide open, andfinding an obstruction behind it, immediately divined the cause, and appliedTickler to its further investigation. She concluded by throwing me—I oftenserved as a connubial missile—at Joe, who, glad to get hold of me on any terms,passed me on into the chimney and quietly fenced me up there with his greatleg.
"Where have you been, you young monkey?" said Mrs. Joe, stamping her foot."Tell me directly what you've been doing to wear me away with fret and frightand worrit, or I'd have you out of that corner if you was fifty Pips, and hewas five hundred Gargerys."
"I have only been to the churchyard," said I, from my stool, crying and rubbingmyself.
"Churchyard!" repeated my sister. "If it warn't for me you'd have been to thechurchyard long ago, and stayed there. Who brought you up by hand?"
"You did," said I.
"And why did I do it, I should like to know?" exclaimed my sister.
I whimpered, "I don't know."
"I don't!" said my sister. "I'd never do it again! I know that. I maytruly say I've never had this apron of mine off since born you were. It's badenough to be a blacksmith's wife (and him a Gargery) without being yourmother."
My thoughts strayed from that question as I looked disconsolately at the fire.For the fugitive out on the marshes with the ironed leg, the mysterious youngman, the file, the food, and the dreadful pledge I was under to commit alarceny on those sheltering premises, rose before me in the avenging coals.
"Hah!" said Mrs. Joe, restoring Tickler to his station. "Churchyard, indeed!You may well say churchyard, you two." One of us, by the by, had not said it atall. "You'll drive me to the churchyard betwixt you, one of these days,and O, a pr-r-recious pair you'd be without me!"
As she applied herself to set the tea-things, Joe peeped down at me over hisleg, as if he were mentally casting me and himself up, and calculating whatkind of pair we practically should make, under the grievous circumstancesforeshadowed. After that, he sat feeling his right-side flaxen curls andwhisker, and following Mrs. Joe about with his blue eyes, as his manner alwayswas at squally times.
My sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread and butter for us, thatnever varied. First, with her left hand she jammed the loaf hard and fastagainst her bib,—where it sometimes got a pin into it, and sometimes a needle,which we afterwards got into our mouths. Then she took some butter (not toomuch) on a knife and spread it on the loaf, in an apothecary kind of way, as ifshe were making a plaster,—using both sides of the knife with a slappingdexterity, and trimming and moulding the butter off round the crust. Then, shegave the knife a final smart wipe on the edge of the plaster, and then sawed avery thick round off the loaf: which she finally, before separating from theloaf, hewed into two halves, of which Joe got one, and I the other.
On the present occasion, though I was hungry, I dared not eat my slice. I feltthat I must have something in reserve for my dreadful acquaintance, and hisally the still more dreadful young man. I knew Mrs. Joe's housekeeping to be ofthe strictest kind, and that my larcenous researches might find nothingavailable in the safe. Therefore I resolved to put my hunk of bread and butterdown the leg of my trousers.
The effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this purpose I foundto be quite awful. It was as if I had to make up my mind to leap from the topof a high house, or plunge into a great depth of water. And it was made themore difficult by the unconscious Joe. In our already-mentioned freemasonry asfellow-sufferers, and in his good-natured companionship with me, it was ourevening habit to compare the way we bit through our slices, by silently holdingthem up to each other's admiration now and then,—which stimulated us to newexertions. To-night, Joe several times invited me, by the display of his fastdiminishing slice, to enter upon our usual friendly competition; but he foundme, each time, with my yellow mug of tea on one knee, and my untouched breadand butter on the other. At last, I desperately considered that the thing Icontemplated must be done, and that it had best be done in the least improbablemanner consistent with the circumstances. I took advantage of a moment when Joehad just looked at me, and got my bread and butter down my leg.
Joe was evidently made uncomfortable by what he supposed to be my loss ofappetite, and took a thoughtful bite out of his slice, which he didn't seem toenjoy. He turned it about in his mouth much longer than usual, pondering overit a good deal, and after all gulped it down like a pill. He was about to takeanother bite, and had just got his head on one side for a good purchase on it,when his eye fell on me, and he saw that my bread and butter was gone.
The wonder and consternation with which Joe stopped on the threshold of hisbite and stared at me, were too evident to escape my sister's observation.
"What's the matter now?" said she, smartly, as she put down her cup.
"I say, you know!" muttered Joe, shaking his head at me in very seriousremonstrance. "Pip, old chap! You'll do yourself a mischief. It'll sticksomewhere. You can't have chawed it, Pip."
"What's the matter now?" repeated my sister, more sharply than before.
"If you can cough any trifle on it up, Pip, I'd recommend you to do it," saidJoe, all aghast. "Manners is manners, but still your elth's your elth."
By this time, my sister was quite desperate, so she pounced on Joe, and, takinghim by the two whiskers, knocked his head for a little while against the wallbehind him, while I sat in the corner, looking guiltily on.
"Now, perhaps you'll mention what's the matter," said my sister, out of breath,"you staring great stuck pig."
Joe looked at her in a helpless way, then took a helpless bite, and looked atme again.
"You know, Pip," said Joe, solemnly, with his last bite in his cheek, andspeaking in a confidential voice, as if we two were quite alone, "you and me isalways friends, and I'd be the last to tell upon you, any time. But such a—" hemoved his chair and looked about the floor between us, and then again atme—"such a most oncommon Bolt as that!"
"Been bolting his food, has he?" cried my sister.
"You know, old chap," said Joe, looking at me, and not at Mrs. Joe, with hisbite still in his cheek, "I Bolted, myself, when I was your age—frequent—and asa boy I've been among a many Bolters; but I never see your Bolting equal yet,Pip, and it's a mercy you ain't Bolted dead."
My sister made a dive at me, and fished me up by the hair, saying nothing morethan the awful words, "You come along and be dosed."
Some medical beast had revived Tar-water in those days as a fine medicine, andMrs. Joe always kept a supply of it in the cupboard; having a belief in itsvirtues correspondent to its nastiness. At the best of times, so much of thiselixir was administered to me as a choice restorative, that I was conscious ofgoing about, smelling like a new fence. On this particular evening the urgencyof my case demanded a pint of this mixture, which was poured down my throat,for my greater comfort, while Mrs. Joe held my head under her arm, as a bootwould be held in a bootjack. Joe got off with half a pint; but was made toswallow that (much to his disturbance, as he sat slowly munching and meditatingbefore the fire), "because he had had a turn." Judging from myself, I shouldsay he certainly had a turn afterwards, if he had had none before.
Conscience is a dreadful thing when it accuses man or boy; but when, in thecase of a boy, that secret burden co-operates with another secret burden downthe leg of his trousers, it is (as I can testify) a great punishment. Theguilty knowledge that I was going to rob Mrs. Joe—I never thought I was goingto rob Joe, for I never thought of any of the housekeeping property ashis—united to the necessity of always keeping one hand on my bread and butteras I sat, or when I was ordered about the kitchen on any small errand, almostdrove me out of my mind. Then, as the marsh winds made the fire glow and flare,I thought I heard the voice outside, of the man with the iron on his leg whohad sworn me to secrecy, declaring that he couldn't and wouldn't starve untilto-morrow, but must be fed now. At other times, I thought, What if the youngman who was with so much difficulty restrained from imbruing his hands in meshould yield to a constitutional impatience, or should mistake the time, andshould think himself accredited to my heart and liver to-night, instead ofto-morrow! If ever anybody's hair stood on end with terror, mine must have doneso then. But, perhaps, nobody's ever did?
It was Christmas Eve, and I had to stir the pudding for next day, with acopper-stick, from seven to eight by the Dutch clock. I tried it with the loadupon my leg (and that made me think afresh of the man with the load onhis leg), and found the tendency of exercise to bring the bread andbutter out at my ankle, quite unmanageable. Happily I slipped away, anddeposited that part of my conscience in my garret bedroom.
"Hark!" said I, when I had done my stirring, and was taking a final warm in thechimney corner before being sent up to bed; "was that great guns, Joe?"
"Ah!" said Joe. "There's another conwict off."
"What does that mean, Joe?" said I.
Mrs. Joe, who always took explanations upon herself, said, snappishly,"Escaped. Escaped." Administering the definition like Tar-water.
While Mrs. Joe sat with her head bending over her needlework, I put my mouthinto the forms of saying to Joe, "What's a convict?" Joe put his mouthinto the forms of returning such a highly elaborate answer, that I could makeout nothing of it but the single word "Pip."
"There was a conwict off last night," said Joe, aloud, "after sunset-gun. Andthey fired warning of him. And now it appears they're firing warning ofanother."
"Who's firing?" said I.
"Drat that boy," interposed my sister, frowning at me over her work, "what aquestioner he is. Ask no questions, and you'll be told no lies."
It was not very polite to herself, I thought, to imply that I should be toldlies by her even if I did ask questions. But she never was polite unless therewas company.
At this point Joe greatly augmented my curiosity by taking the utmost pains toopen his mouth very wide, and to put it into the form of a word that looked tome like "sulks." Therefore, I naturally pointed to Mrs. Joe, and put my mouthinto the form of saying, "her?" But Joe wouldn't hear of that, at all, andagain opened his mouth very wide, and shook the form of a most emphatic wordout of it. But I could make nothing of the word.
"Mrs. Joe," said I, as a last resort, "I should like to know—if you wouldn'tmuch mind—where the firing comes from?"
"Lord bless the boy!" exclaimed my sister, as if she didn't quite mean that butrather the contrary. "From the Hulks!"
"Oh-h!" said I, looking at Joe. "Hulks!"
Joe gave a reproachful cough, as much as to say, "Well, I told you so."
"And please, what's Hulks?" said I.
"That's the way with this boy!" exclaimed my sister, pointing me out with herneedle and thread, and shaking her head at me. "Answer him one question, andhe'll ask you a dozen directly. Hulks are prison-ships, right 'cross th'meshes." We always used that name for marshes, in our country.
"I wonder who's put into prison-ships, and why they're put there?" said I, in ageneral way, and with quiet desperation.
It was too much for Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose. "I tell you what, youngfellow," said she, "I didn't bring you up by hand to badger people's lives out.It would be blame to me and not praise, if I had. People are put in the Hulksbecause they murder, and because they rob, and forge, and do all sorts of bad;and they always begin by asking questions. Now, you get along to bed!"
I was never allowed a candle to light me to bed, and, as I went upstairs in thedark, with my head tingling,—from Mrs. Joe's thimble having played thetambourine upon it, to accompany her last words,—I felt fearfully sensible ofthe great convenience that the hulks were handy for me. I was clearly on my waythere. I had begun by asking questions, and I was going to rob Mrs. Joe.
Since that time, which is far enough away now, I have often thought that fewpeople know what secrecy there is in the young under terror. No matter howunreasonable the terror, so that it be terror. I was in mortal terror of theyoung man who wanted my heart and liver; I was in mortal terror of myinterlocutor with the iron leg; I was in mortal terror of myself, from whom anawful promise had been extracted; I had no hope of deliverance through myall-powerful sister, who repulsed me at every turn; I am afraid to think ofwhat I might have done on requirement, in the secrecy of my terror.
If I slept at all that night, it was only to imagine myself drifting down theriver on a strong spring-tide, to the Hulks; a ghostly pirate calling out to methrough a speaking-trumpet, as I passed the gibbet-station, that I had bettercome ashore and be hanged there at once, and not put it off. I was afraid tosleep, even if I had been inclined, for I knew that at the first faint dawn ofmorning I must rob the pantry. There was no doing it in the night, for therewas no getting a light by easy friction then; to have got one I must havestruck it out of flint and steel, and have made a noise like the very piratehimself rattling his chains.
As soon as the great black velvet pall outside my little window was shot withgrey, I got up and went downstairs; every board upon the way, and every crackin every board calling after me, "Stop thief!" and "Get up, Mrs. Joe!" In thepantry, which was far more abundantly supplied than usual, owing to the season,I was very much alarmed by a hare hanging up by the heels, whom I ratherthought I caught, when my back was half turned, winking. I had no time forverification, no time for selection, no time for anything, for I had no time tospare. I stole some bread, some rind of cheese, about half a jar of mincemeat(which I tied up in my pocket-handkerchief with my last night's slice), somebrandy from a stone bottle (which I decanted into a glass bottle I had secretlyused for making that intoxicating fluid, Spanish-liquorice-water, up in myroom: diluting the stone bottle from a jug in the kitchen cupboard), a meatbone with very little on it, and a beautiful round compact pork pie. I wasnearly going away without the pie, but I was tempted to mount upon a shelf, tolook what it was that was put away so carefully in a covered earthenware dishin a corner, and I found it was the pie, and I took it in the hope that it wasnot intended for early use, and would not be missed for some time.
There was a door in the kitchen, communicating with the forge; I unlocked andunbolted that door, and got a file from among Joe's tools. Then I put thefastenings as I had found them, opened the door at which I had entered when Iran home last night, shut it, and ran for the misty marshes.
