
Chapter XX.
Thejourney from our town to the metropolis was a journey of about five hours. Itwas a little past midday when the four-horse stage-coach by which I was apassenger, got into the ravel of traffic frayed out about the Cross Keys, WoodStreet, Cheapside, London.
We Britons had at that time particularly settled that it was treasonable todoubt our having and our being the best of everything: otherwise, while I wasscared by the immensity of London, I think I might have had some faint doubtswhether it was not rather ugly, crooked, narrow, and dirty.
Mr. Jaggers had duly sent me his address; it was, Little Britain, and he hadwritten after it on his card, "just out of Smithfield, and close by thecoach-office." Nevertheless, a hackney-coachman, who seemed to have as manycapes to his greasy great-coat as he was years old, packed me up in his coachand hemmed me in with a folding and jingling barrier of steps, as if he weregoing to take me fifty miles. His getting on his box, which I remember to havebeen decorated with an old weather-stained pea-green hammercloth moth-eateninto rags, was quite a work of time. It was a wonderful equipage, with sixgreat coronets outside, and ragged things behind for I don't know how manyfootmen to hold on by, and a harrow below them, to prevent amateur footmen fromyielding to the temptation.
I had scarcely had time to enjoy the coach and to think how like a straw-yardit was, and yet how like a rag-shop, and to wonder why the horses' nose-bagswere kept inside, when I observed the coachman beginning to get down, as if wewere going to stop presently. And stop we presently did, in a gloomy street, atcertain offices with an open door, whereon was painted MR.JAGGERS.
"How much?" I asked the coachman.
The coachman answered, "A shilling—unless you wish to make it more."
I naturally said I had no wish to make it more.
"Then it must be a shilling," observed the coachman. "I don't want to get intotrouble. I know him!" He darkly closed an eye at Mr. Jaggers'sname, and shook his head.
When he had got his shilling, and had in course of time completed the ascent tohis box, and had got away (which appeared to relieve his mind), I went into thefront office with my little portmanteau in my hand and asked, Was Mr. Jaggersat home?
"He is not," returned the clerk. "He is in Court at present. Am I addressingMr. Pip?"
I signified that he was addressing Mr. Pip.
"Mr. Jaggers left word, would you wait in his room. He couldn't say how long hemight be, having a case on. But it stands to reason, his time being valuable,that he won't be longer than he can help."
With those words, the clerk opened a door, and ushered me into an inner chamberat the back. Here, we found a gentleman with one eye, in a velveteen suit andknee-breeches, who wiped his nose with his sleeve on being interrupted in theperusal of the newspaper.
"Go and wait outside, Mike," said the clerk.
I began to say that I hoped I was not interrupting, when the clerk shoved thisgentleman out with as little ceremony as I ever saw used, and tossing his furcap out after him, left me alone.
Mr. Jaggers's room was lighted by a skylight only, and was a most dismal place;the skylight, eccentrically pitched like a broken head, and the distortedadjoining houses looking as if they had twisted themselves to peep down at methrough it. There were not so many papers about, as I should have expected tosee; and there were some odd objects about, that I should not have expected tosee,—such as an old rusty pistol, a sword in a scabbard, severalstrange-looking boxes and packages, and two dreadful casts on a shelf, of facespeculiarly swollen, and twitchy about the nose. Mr. Jaggers's own high-backedchair was of deadly black horsehair, with rows of brass nails round it, like acoffin; and I fancied I could see how he leaned back in it, and bit hisforefinger at the clients. The room was but small, and the clients seemed tohave had a habit of backing up against the wall; the wall, especially oppositeto Mr. Jaggers's chair, being greasy with shoulders. I recalled, too, that theone-eyed gentleman had shuffled forth against the wall when I was the innocentcause of his being turned out.
I sat down in the cliental chair placed over against Mr. Jaggers's chair, andbecame fascinated by the dismal atmosphere of the place. I called to mind thatthe clerk had the same air of knowing something to everybody else'sdisadvantage, as his master had. I wondered how many other clerks there wereupstairs, and whether they all claimed to have the same detrimental mastery oftheir fellow-creatures. I wondered what was the history of all the odd litterabout the room, and how it came there. I wondered whether the two swollen faceswere of Mr. Jaggers's family, and, if he were so unfortunate as to have had apair of such ill-looking relations, why he stuck them on that dusty perch forthe blacks and flies to settle on, instead of giving them a place at home. Ofcourse I had no experience of a London summer day, and my spirits may have beenoppressed by the hot exhausted air, and by the dust and grit that lay thick oneverything. But I sat wondering and waiting in Mr. Jaggers's close room, untilI really could not bear the two casts on the shelf above Mr. Jaggers's chair,and got up and went out.
When I told the clerk that I would take a turn in the air while I waited, headvised me to go round the corner and I should come into Smithfield. So I cameinto Smithfield; and the shameful place, being all asmear with filth and fatand blood and foam, seemed to stick to me. So, I rubbed it off with allpossible speed by turning into a street where I saw the great black dome ofSaint Paul's bulging at me from behind a grim stone building which a bystandersaid was Newgate Prison. Following the wall of the jail, I found the roadwaycovered with straw to deaden the noise of passing vehicles; and from this, andfrom the quantity of people standing about smelling strongly of spirits andbeer, I inferred that the trials were on.
While I looked about me here, an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk ministerof justice asked me if I would like to step in and hear a trial or so:informing me that he could give me a front place for half a crown, whence Ishould command a full view of the Lord Chief Justice in his wig androbes,—mentioning that awful personage like waxwork, and presently offering himat the reduced price of eighteen-pence. As I declined the proposal on the pleaof an appointment, he was so good as to take me into a yard and show me wherethe gallows was kept, and also where people were publicly whipped, and then heshowed me the Debtors' Door, out of which culprits came to be hanged;heightening the interest of that dreadful portal by giving me to understandthat "four on 'em" would come out at that door the day after to-morrow at eightin the morning, to be killed in a row. This was horrible, and gave me asickening idea of London; the more so as the Lord Chief Justice's proprietorwore (from his hat down to his boots and up again to his pocket-handkerchiefinclusive) mildewed clothes which had evidently not belonged to him originally,and which I took it into my head he had bought cheap of the executioner. Underthese circumstances I thought myself well rid of him for a shilling.
I dropped into the office to ask if Mr. Jaggers had come in yet, and I found hehad not, and I strolled out again. This time, I made the tour of LittleBritain, and turned into Bartholomew Close; and now I became aware that otherpeople were waiting about for Mr. Jaggers, as well as I. There were two men ofsecret appearance lounging in Bartholomew Close, and thoughtfully fitting theirfeet into the cracks of the pavement as they talked together, one of whom saidto the other when they first passed me, that "Jaggers would do it if it was tobe done." There was a knot of three men and two women standing at a corner, andone of the women was crying on her dirty shawl, and the other comforted her bysaying, as she pulled her own shawl over her shoulders, "Jaggers is for him,'Melia, and what more could you have?" There was a red-eyed little Jewwho came into the Close while I was loitering there, in company with a secondlittle Jew whom he sent upon an errand; and while the messenger was gone, Iremarked this Jew, who was of a highly excitable temperament, performing a jigof anxiety under a lamp-post and accompanying himself, in a kind of frenzy,with the words, "O Jaggerth, Jaggerth, Jaggerth! all otherth ith Cag-Maggerth,give me Jaggerth!" These testimonies to the popularity of my guardian made adeep impression on me, and I admired and wondered more than ever.
At length, as I was looking out at the iron gate of Bartholomew Close intoLittle Britain, I saw Mr. Jaggers coming across the road towards me. All theothers who were waiting saw him at the same time, and there was quite a rush athim. Mr. Jaggers, putting a hand on my shoulder and walking me on at his sidewithout saying anything to me, addressed himself to his followers.
First, he took the two secret men.
"Now, I have nothing to say to you," said Mr. Jaggers, throwing hisfinger at them. "I want to know no more than I know. As to the result, it's atoss-up. I told you from the first it was a toss-up. Have you paid Wemmick?"
"We made the money up this morning, sir," said one of the men, submissively,while the other perused Mr. Jaggers's face.
"I don't ask you when you made it up, or where, or whether you made it up atall. Has Wemmick got it?"
"Yes, sir," said both the men together.
"Very well; then you may go. Now, I won't have it!" said Mr Jaggers, waving hishand at them to put them behind him. "If you say a word to me, I'll throw upthe case."
"We thought, Mr. Jaggers—" one of the men began, pulling off his hat.
"That's what I told you not to do," said Mr. Jaggers. "You thought! Ithink for you; that's enough for you. If I want you, I know where to find you;I don't want you to find me. Now I won't have it. I won't hear a word."
The two men looked at one another as Mr. Jaggers waved them behind again, andhumbly fell back and were heard no more.
"And now you!" said Mr. Jaggers, suddenly stopping, and turning on thetwo women with the shawls, from whom the three men had meekly separated,—"Oh!Amelia, is it?"
"Yes, Mr. Jaggers."
"And do you remember," retorted Mr. Jaggers, "that but for me you wouldn't behere and couldn't be here?"
"O yes, sir!" exclaimed both women together. "Lord bless you, sir, well weknows that!"
"Then why," said Mr. Jaggers, "do you come here?"
"My Bill, sir!" the crying woman pleaded.
"Now, I tell you what!" said Mr. Jaggers. "Once for all. If you don't know thatyour Bill's in good hands, I know it. And if you come here bothering about yourBill, I'll make an example of both your Bill and you, and let him slip throughmy fingers. Have you paid Wemmick?"
"O yes, sir! Every farden."
"Very well. Then you have done all you have got to do. Say another word—onesingle word—and Wemmick shall give you your money back."
This terrible threat caused the two women to fall off immediately. No oneremained now but the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr.Jaggers's coat to his lips several times.
"I don't know this man!" said Mr. Jaggers, in the same devastating strain:"What does this fellow want?"
"Ma thear Mithter Jaggerth. Hown brother to Habraham Latharuth?"
"Who's he?" said Mr. Jaggers. "Let go of my coat."
The suitor, kissing the hem of the garment again before relinquishing it,replied, "Habraham Latharuth, on thuthpithion of plate."
"You're too late," said Mr. Jaggers. "I am over the way."
"Holy father, Mithter Jaggerth!" cried my excitable acquaintance, turningwhite, "don't thay you're again Habraham Latharuth!"
"I am," said Mr. Jaggers, "and there's an end of it. Get out of the way."
"Mithter Jaggerth! Half a moment! My hown cuthen'th gone to Mithter Wemmick atthith prethent minute, to hoffer him hany termth. Mithter Jaggerth! Half aquarter of a moment! If you'd have the condethenthun to be bought off from thet'other thide—at hany thuperior prithe!—money no object!—MithterJaggerth—Mithter—!"
My guardian threw his supplicant off with supreme indifference, and left himdancing on the pavement as if it were red hot. Without further interruption, wereached the front office, where we found the clerk and the man in velveteenwith the fur cap.
"Here's Mike," said the clerk, getting down from his stool, and approaching Mr.Jaggers confidentially.
"Oh!" said Mr. Jaggers, turning to the man, who was pulling a lock of hair inthe middle of his forehead, like the Bull in Cock Robin pulling at thebell-rope; "your man comes on this afternoon. Well?"
"Well, Mas'r Jaggers," returned Mike, in the voice of a sufferer from aconstitutional cold; "arter a deal o' trouble, I've found one, sir, as mightdo."
"What is he prepared to swear?"
"Well, Mas'r Jaggers," said Mike, wiping his nose on his fur cap this time; "ina general way, anythink."
Mr. Jaggers suddenly became most irate. "Now, I warned you before," said he,throwing his forefinger at the terrified client, "that if you ever presumed totalk in that way here, I'd make an example of you. You infernal scoundrel, howdare you tell ME that?"
The client looked scared, but bewildered too, as if he were unconscious what hehad done.
"Spooney!" said the clerk, in a low voice, giving him a stir with his elbow."Soft Head! Need you say it face to face?"
"Now, I ask you, you blundering booby," said my guardian, very sternly, "oncemore and for the last time, what the man you have brought here is prepared toswear?"
Mike looked hard at my guardian, as if he were trying to learn a lesson fromhis face, and slowly replied, "Ayther to character, or to having been in hiscompany and never left him all the night in question."
"Now, be careful. In what station of life is this man?"
Mike looked at his cap, and looked at the floor, and looked at the ceiling, andlooked at the clerk, and even looked at me, before beginning to reply in anervous manner, "We've dressed him up like—" when my guardian blustered out,—
"What? You WILL, will you?"
("Spooney!" added the clerk again, with another stir.)
After some helpless casting about, Mike brightened and began again:—
"He is dressed like a 'spectable pieman. A sort of a pastry-cook."
"Is he here?" asked my guardian.
"I left him," said Mike, "a setting on some doorsteps round the corner."
"Take him past that window, and let me see him."
The window indicated was the office window. We all three went to it, behind thewire blind, and presently saw the client go by in an accidental manner, with amurderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a papercap. This guileless confectioner was not by any means sober, and had a blackeye in the green stage of recovery, which was painted over.
"Tell him to take his witness away directly," said my guardian to the clerk, inextreme disgust, "and ask him what he means by bringing such a fellow as that."
My guardian then took me into his own room, and while he lunched, standing,from a sandwich-box and a pocket-flask of sherry (he seemed to bully his verysandwich as he ate it), informed me what arrangements he had made for me. I wasto go to "Barnard's Inn," to young Mr. Pocket's rooms, where a bed had beensent in for my accommodation; I was to remain with young Mr. Pocket untilMonday; on Monday I was to go with him to his father's house on a visit, that Imight try how I liked it. Also, I was told what my allowance was to be,—it wasa very liberal one,—and had handed to me from one of my guardian's drawers, thecards of certain tradesmen with whom I was to deal for all kinds of clothes,and such other things as I could in reason want. "You will find your creditgood, Mr. Pip," said my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a wholecaskful, as he hastily refreshed himself, "but I shall by this means be able tocheck your bills, and to pull you up if I find you outrunning the constable. Ofcourse you'll go wrong somehow, but that's no fault of mine."
After I had pondered a little over this encouraging sentiment, I asked Mr.Jaggers if I could send for a coach? He said it was not worth while, I was sonear my destination; Wemmick should walk round with me, if I pleased.
I then found that Wemmick was the clerk in the next room. Another clerk wasrung down from upstairs to take his place while he was out, and I accompaniedhim into the street, after shaking hands with my guardian. We found a new setof people lingering outside, but Wemmick made a way among them by saying coollyyet decisively, "I tell you it's no use; he won't have a word to say to one ofyou;" and we soon got clear of them, and went on side by side.
