
Chapter XXI.
Casting my eyes on Mr. Wemmick as we went along, to see what hewas like in the light of day, I found him to be a dry man, rather short instature, with a square wooden face, whose expression seemed to have beenimperfectly chipped out with a dull-edged chisel. There were some marks in itthat might have been dimples, if the material had been softer and theinstrument finer, but which, as it was, were only dints. The chisel had madethree or four of these attempts at embellishment over his nose, but had giventhem up without an effort to smooth them off. I judged him to be a bachelorfrom the frayed condition of his linen, and he appeared to have sustained agood many bereavements; for he wore at least four mourning rings, besides abrooch representing a lady and a weeping willow at a tomb with an urn on it. Inoticed, too, that several rings and seals hung at his watch-chain, as if hewere quite laden with remembrances of departed friends. He had glitteringeyes,—small, keen, and black,—and thin wide mottled lips. He had had them, tothe best of my belief, from forty to fifty years.
"So you were never in London before?" said Mr. Wemmick to me.
"No," said I.
"I was new here once," said Mr. Wemmick. "Rum to think of now!"
"You are well acquainted with it now?"
"Why, yes," said Mr. Wemmick. "I know the moves of it."
"Is it a very wicked place?" I asked, more for the sake of saying somethingthan for information.
"You may get cheated, robbed, and murdered in London. But there are plenty ofpeople anywhere, who'll do that for you."
"If there is bad blood between you and them," said I, to soften it off alittle.
"O! I don't know about bad blood," returned Mr. Wemmick; "there's not much badblood about. They'll do it, if there's anything to be got by it."
"That makes it worse."
"You think so?" returned Mr. Wemmick. "Much about the same, I should say."
He wore his hat on the back of his head, and looked straight before him:walking in a self-contained way as if there were nothing in the streets toclaim his attention. His mouth was such a post-office of a mouth that he had amechanical appearance of smiling. We had got to the top of Holborn Hill beforeI knew that it was merely a mechanical appearance, and that he was not smilingat all.
"Do you know where Mr. Matthew Pocket lives?" I asked Mr. Wemmick.
"Yes," said he, nodding in the direction. "At Hammersmith, west of London."
"Is that far?"
"Well! Say five miles."
"Do you know him?"
"Why, you're a regular cross-examiner!" said Mr. Wemmick, looking at me with anapproving air. "Yes, I know him. I know him!"
There was an air of toleration or depreciation about his utterance of thesewords that rather depressed me; and I was still looking sideways at his blockof a face in search of any encouraging note to the text, when he said here wewere at Barnard's Inn. My depression was not alleviated by the announcement,for, I had supposed that establishment to be an hotel kept by Mr. Barnard, towhich the Blue Boar in our town was a mere public-house. Whereas I now foundBarnard to be a disembodied spirit, or a fiction, and his inn the dingiestcollection of shabby buildings ever squeezed together in a rank corner as aclub for Tom-cats.
We entered this haven through a wicket-gate, and were disgorged by anintroductory passage into a melancholy little square that looked to me like aflat burying-ground. I thought it had the most dismal trees in it, and the mostdismal sparrows, and the most dismal cats, and the most dismal houses (innumber half a dozen or so), that I had ever seen. I thought the windows of thesets of chambers into which those houses were divided were in every stage ofdilapidated blind and curtain, crippled flower-pot, cracked glass, dusty decay,and miserable makeshift; while To Let, To Let, To Let, glared at me from emptyrooms, as if no new wretches ever came there, and the vengeance of the soul ofBarnard were being slowly appeased by the gradual suicide of the presentoccupants and their unholy interment under the gravel. A frowzy mourning ofsoot and smoke attired this forlorn creation of Barnard, and it had strewnashes on its head, and was undergoing penance and humiliation as a meredust-hole. Thus far my sense of sight; while dry rot and wet rot and all thesilent rots that rot in neglected roof and cellar,—rot of rat and mouse and bugand coaching-stables near at hand besides—addressed themselves faintly to mysense of smell, and moaned, "Try Barnard's Mixture."
So imperfect was this realisation of the first of my great expectations, that Ilooked in dismay at Mr. Wemmick. "Ah!" said he, mistaking me; "the retirementreminds you of the country. So it does me."
He led me into a corner and conducted me up a flight of stairs,—which appearedto me to be slowly collapsing into sawdust, so that one of those days the upperlodgers would look out at their doors and find themselves without the means ofcoming down,—to a set of chambers on the top floor. MR.POCKET, JUN., was painted on the door, and therewas a label on the letter-box, "Return shortly."
"He hardly thought you'd come so soon," Mr. Wemmick explained. "You don't wantme any more?"
"No, thank you," said I.
"As I keep the cash," Mr. Wemmick observed, "we shall most likely meet prettyoften. Good day."
"Good day."
I put out my hand, and Mr. Wemmick at first looked at it as if he thought Iwanted something. Then he looked at me, and said, correcting himself,—
"To be sure! Yes. You're in the habit of shaking hands?"
I was rather confused, thinking it must be out of the London fashion, but saidyes.
"I have got so out of it!" said Mr. Wemmick,—"except at last. Very glad, I'msure, to make your acquaintance. Good day!"
When we had shaken hands and he was gone, I opened the staircase window and hadnearly beheaded myself, for, the lines had rotted away, and it came down likethe guillotine. Happily it was so quick that I had not put my head out. Afterthis escape, I was content to take a foggy view of the Inn through the window'sencrusting dirt, and to stand dolefully looking out, saying to myself thatLondon was decidedly overrated.
Mr. Pocket, Junior's, idea of Shortly was not mine, for I had nearly maddenedmyself with looking out for half an hour, and had written my name with myfinger several times in the dirt of every pane in the window, before I heardfootsteps on the stairs. Gradually there arose before me the hat, head,neckcloth, waistcoat, trousers, boots, of a member of society of about my ownstanding. He had a paper-bag under each arm and a pottle of strawberries in onehand, and was out of breath.
"Mr. Pip?" said he.
"Mr. Pocket?" said I.
"Dear me!" he exclaimed. "I am extremely sorry; but I knew there was a coachfrom your part of the country at midday, and I thought you would come by thatone. The fact is, I have been out on your account,—not that that is anyexcuse,—for I thought, coming from the country, you might like a little fruitafter dinner, and I went to Covent Garden Market to get it good."
For a reason that I had, I felt as if my eyes would start out of my head. Iacknowledged his attention incoherently, and began to think this was a dream.
"Dear me!" said Mr. Pocket, Junior. "This door sticks so!"
As he was fast making jam of his fruit by wrestling with the door while thepaper-bags were under his arms, I begged him to allow me to hold them. Herelinquished them with an agreeable smile, and combated with the door as if itwere a wild beast. It yielded so suddenly at last, that he staggered back uponme, and I staggered back upon the opposite door, and we both laughed. But stillI felt as if my eyes must start out of my head, and as if this must be a dream.
"Pray come in," said Mr. Pocket, Junior. "Allow me to lead the way. I am ratherbare here, but I hope you'll be able to make out tolerably well till Monday. Myfather thought you would get on more agreeably through to-morrow with me thanwith him, and might like to take a walk about London. I am sure I shall be veryhappy to show London to you. As to our table, you won't find that bad, I hope,for it will be supplied from our coffee-house here, and (it is only right Ishould add) at your expense, such being Mr. Jaggers's directions. As to ourlodging, it's not by any means splendid, because I have my own bread to earn,and my father hasn't anything to give me, and I shouldn't be willing to takeit, if he had. This is our sitting-room,—just such chairs and tables and carpetand so forth, you see, as they could spare from home. You mustn't give mecredit for the tablecloth and spoons and castors, because they come for youfrom the coffee-house. This is my little bedroom; rather musty, but Barnard'sis musty. This is your bedroom; the furniture's hired for the occasion,but I trust it will answer the purpose; if you should want anything, I'll goand fetch it. The chambers are retired, and we shall be alone together, but weshan't fight, I dare say. But dear me, I beg your pardon, you're holding thefruit all this time. Pray let me take these bags from you. I am quite ashamed."
As I stood opposite to Mr. Pocket, Junior, delivering him the bags, One, Two, Isaw the starting appearance come into his own eyes that I knew to be in mine,and he said, falling back,—
"Lord bless me, you're the prowling boy!"
"And you," said I, "are the pale young gentleman!"
