
Chapter XXII.
Thepale young gentleman and I stood contemplating one another in Barnard's Inn,until we both burst out laughing. "The idea of its being you!" said he. "Theidea of its being you!" said I. And then we contemplated one anotherafresh, and laughed again. "Well!" said the pale young gentleman, reaching outhis hand good-humouredly, "it's all over now, I hope, and it will bemagnanimous in you if you'll forgive me for having knocked you about so."
I derived from this speech that Mr. Herbert Pocket (for Herbert was the paleyoung gentleman's name) still rather confounded his intention with hisexecution. But I made a modest reply, and we shook hands warmly.
"You hadn't come into your good fortune at that time?" said Herbert Pocket.
"No," said I.
"No," he acquiesced: "I heard it had happened very lately. I was ratheron the lookout for good fortune then."
"Indeed?"
"Yes. Miss Havisham had sent for me, to see if she could take a fancy to me.But she couldn't,—at all events, she didn't."
I thought it polite to remark that I was surprised to hear that.
"Bad taste," said Herbert, laughing, "but a fact. Yes, she had sent for me on atrial visit, and if I had come out of it successfully, I suppose I should havebeen provided for; perhaps I should have been what-you-may-called it toEstella."
"What's that?" I asked, with sudden gravity.
He was arranging his fruit in plates while we talked, which divided hisattention, and was the cause of his having made this lapse of a word."Affianced," he explained, still busy with the fruit. "Betrothed. Engaged.What's-his-named. Any word of that sort."
"How did you bear your disappointment?" I asked.
"Pooh!" said he, "I didn't care much for it. She's a Tartar."
"Miss Havisham?"
"I don't say no to that, but I meant Estella. That girl's hard and haughty andcapricious to the last degree, and has been brought up by Miss Havisham towreak revenge on all the male sex."
"What relation is she to Miss Havisham?"
"None," said he. "Only adopted."
"Why should she wreak revenge on all the male sex? What revenge?"
"Lord, Mr. Pip!" said he. "Don't you know?"
"No," said I.
"Dear me! It's quite a story, and shall be saved till dinner-time. And now letme take the liberty of asking you a question. How did you come there, thatday?"
I told him, and he was attentive until I had finished, and then burst outlaughing again, and asked me if I was sore afterwards? I didn't ask him ifhe was, for my conviction on that point was perfectly established.
"Mr. Jaggers is your guardian, I understand?" he went on.
"Yes."
"You know he is Miss Havisham's man of business and solicitor, and has herconfidence when nobody else has?"
This was bringing me (I felt) towards dangerous ground. I answered with aconstraint I made no attempt to disguise, that I had seen Mr. Jaggers in MissHavisham's house on the very day of our combat, but never at any other time,and that I believed he had no recollection of having ever seen me there.
"He was so obliging as to suggest my father for your tutor, and he called on myfather to propose it. Of course he knew about my father from his connectionwith Miss Havisham. My father is Miss Havisham's cousin; not that that impliesfamiliar intercourse between them, for he is a bad courtier and will notpropitiate her."
Herbert Pocket had a frank and easy way with him that was very taking. I hadnever seen any one then, and I have never seen any one since, who more stronglyexpressed to me, in every look and tone, a natural incapacity to do anythingsecret and mean. There was something wonderfully hopeful about his general air,and something that at the same time whispered to me he would never be verysuccessful or rich. I don't know how this was. I became imbued with the notionon that first occasion before we sat down to dinner, but I cannot define bywhat means.
He was still a pale young gentleman, and had a certain conquered languor abouthim in the midst of his spirits and briskness, that did not seem indicative ofnatural strength. He had not a handsome face, but it was better than handsome:being extremely amiable and cheerful. His figure was a little ungainly, as inthe days when my knuckles had taken such liberties with it, but it looked as ifit would always be light and young. Whether Mr. Trabb's local work would havesat more gracefully on him than on me, may be a question; but I am consciousthat he carried off his rather old clothes much better than I carried off mynew suit.
As he was so communicative, I felt that reserve on my part would be a badreturn unsuited to our years. I therefore told him my small story, and laidstress on my being forbidden to inquire who my benefactor was. I furthermentioned that as I had been brought up a blacksmith in a country place, andknew very little of the ways of politeness, I would take it as a great kindnessin him if he would give me a hint whenever he saw me at a loss or going wrong.
"With pleasure," said he, "though I venture to prophesy that you'll want veryfew hints. I dare say we shall be often together, and I should like to banishany needless restraint between us. Will you do me the favour to begin at onceto call me by my Christian name, Herbert?"
I thanked him and said I would. I informed him in exchange that my Christianname was Philip.
"I don't take to Philip," said he, smiling, "for it sounds like a moral boy outof the spelling-book, who was so lazy that he fell into a pond, or so fat thathe couldn't see out of his eyes, or so avaricious that he locked up his caketill the mice ate it, or so determined to go a bird's-nesting that he gothimself eaten by bears who lived handy in the neighbourhood. I tell you what Ishould like. We are so harmonious, and you have been a blacksmith,—would youmind it?"
"I shouldn't mind anything that you propose," I answered, "but I don'tunderstand you."
"Would you mind Handel for a familiar name? There's a charming piece of musicby Handel, called the Harmonious Blacksmith."
"I should like it very much."
"Then, my dear Handel," said he, turning round as the door opened, "here is thedinner, and I must beg of you to take the top of the table, because the dinneris of your providing."
This I would not hear of, so he took the top, and I faced him. It was a nicelittle dinner,—seemed to me then a very Lord Mayor's Feast,—and it acquiredadditional relish from being eaten under those independent circumstances, withno old people by, and with London all around us. This again was heightened by acertain gypsy character that set the banquet off; for while the table was, asMr. Pumblechook might have said, the lap of luxury,—being entirely furnishedforth from the coffee-house,—the circumjacent region of sitting-room was of acomparatively pastureless and shifty character; imposing on the waiter thewandering habits of putting the covers on the floor (where he fell over them),the melted butter in the arm-chair, the bread on the bookshelves, the cheese inthe coal-scuttle, and the boiled fowl into my bed in the next room,—where Ifound much of its parsley and butter in a state of congelation when I retiredfor the night. All this made the feast delightful, and when the waiter was notthere to watch me, my pleasure was without alloy.
We had made some progress in the dinner, when I reminded Herbert of his promiseto tell me about Miss Havisham.
"True," he replied. "I'll redeem it at once. Let me introduce the topic,Handel, by mentioning that in London it is not the custom to put the knife inthe mouth,—for fear of accidents,—and that while the fork is reserved for thatuse, it is not put further in than necessary. It is scarcely worth mentioning,only it's as well to do as other people do. Also, the spoon is not generallyused over-hand, but under. This has two advantages. You get at your mouthbetter (which after all is the object), and you save a good deal of theattitude of opening oysters, on the part of the right elbow."
He offered these friendly suggestions in such a lively way, that we bothlaughed and I scarcely blushed.
"Now," he pursued, "concerning Miss Havisham. Miss Havisham, you must know, wasa spoilt child. Her mother died when she was a baby, and her father denied hernothing. Her father was a country gentleman down in your part of the world, andwas a brewer. I don't know why it should be a crack thing to be a brewer; butit is indisputable that while you cannot possibly be genteel and bake, you maybe as genteel as never was and brew. You see it every day."
"Yet a gentleman may not keep a public-house; may he?" said I.
"Not on any account," returned Herbert; "but a public-house may keep agentleman. Well! Mr. Havisham was very rich and very proud. So was hisdaughter."
"Miss Havisham was an only child?" I hazarded.
"Stop a moment, I am coming to that. No, she was not an only child; she had ahalf-brother. Her father privately married again—his cook, I rather think."
"I thought he was proud," said I.
"My good Handel, so he was. He married his second wife privately, because hewas proud, and in course of time she died. When she was dead, Iapprehend he first told his daughter what he had done, and then the son becamea part of the family, residing in the house you are acquainted with. As the songrew a young man, he turned out riotous, extravagant, undutiful,—altogetherbad. At last his father disinherited him; but he softened when he was dying,and left him well off, though not nearly so well off as Miss Havisham.—Takeanother glass of wine, and excuse my mentioning that society as a body does notexpect one to be so strictly conscientious in emptying one's glass, as to turnit bottom upwards with the rim on one's nose."
I had been doing this, in an excess of attention to his recital. I thanked him,and apologised. He said, "Not at all," and resumed.
"Miss Havisham was now an heiress, and you may suppose was looked after as agreat match. Her half-brother had now ample means again, but what with debtsand what with new madness wasted them most fearfully again. There were strongerdifferences between him and her than there had been between him and his father,and it is suspected that he cherished a deep and mortal grudge against her ashaving influenced the father's anger. Now, I come to the cruel part of thestory,—merely breaking off, my dear Handel, to remark that a dinner-napkin willnot go into a tumbler."
Why I was trying to pack mine into my tumbler, I am wholly unable to say. Ionly know that I found myself, with a perseverance worthy of a much bettercause, making the most strenuous exertions to compress it within those limits.Again I thanked him and apologised, and again he said in the cheerfullestmanner, "Not at all, I am sure!" and resumed.
"There appeared upon the scene—say at the races, or the public balls, oranywhere else you like—a certain man, who made love to Miss Havisham. I neversaw him (for this happened five-and-twenty years ago, before you and I were,Handel), but I have heard my father mention that he was a showy man, and thekind of man for the purpose. But that he was not to be, without ignorance orprejudice, mistaken for a gentleman, my father most strongly asseverates;because it is a principle of his that no man who was not a true gentleman atheart ever was, since the world began, a true gentleman in manner. He says, novarnish can hide the grain of the wood; and that the more varnish you put on,the more the grain will express itself. Well! This man pursued Miss Havishamclosely, and professed to be devoted to her. I believe she had not shown muchsusceptibility up to that time; but all the susceptibility she possessedcertainly came out then, and she passionately loved him. There is no doubt thatshe perfectly idolized him. He practised on her affection in that systematicway, that he got great sums of money from her, and he induced her to buy herbrother out of a share in the brewery (which had been weakly left him by hisfather) at an immense price, on the plea that when he was her husband he musthold and manage it all. Your guardian was not at that time in Miss Havisham'scounsels, and she was too haughty and too much in love to be advised by anyone. Her relations were poor and scheming, with the exception of my father; hewas poor enough, but not time-serving or jealous. The only independent oneamong them, he warned her that she was doing too much for this man, and wasplacing herself too unreservedly in his power. She took the first opportunityof angrily ordering my father out of the house, in his presence, and my fatherhas never seen her since."
I thought of her having said, "Matthew will come and see me at last when I amlaid dead upon that table;" and I asked Herbert whether his father was soinveterate against her?
"It's not that," said he, "but she charged him, in the presence of her intendedhusband, with being disappointed in the hope of fawning upon her for his ownadvancement, and, if he were to go to her now, it would look true—even tohim—and even to her. To return to the man and make an end of him. The marriageday was fixed, the wedding dresses were bought, the wedding tour was plannedout, the wedding guests were invited. The day came, but not the bridegroom. Hewrote her a letter—"
"Which she received," I struck in, "when she was dressing for her marriage? Attwenty minutes to nine?"
"At the hour and minute," said Herbert, nodding, "at which she afterwardsstopped all the clocks. What was in it, further than that it most heartlesslybroke the marriage off, I can't tell you, because I don't know. When sherecovered from a bad illness that she had, she laid the whole place waste, asyou have seen it, and she has never since looked upon the light of day."
"Is that all the story?" I asked, after considering it.
"All I know of it; and indeed I only know so much, through piecing it out formyself; for my father always avoids it, and, even when Miss Havisham invited meto go there, told me no more of it than it was absolutely requisite I shouldunderstand. But I have forgotten one thing. It has been supposed that the manto whom she gave her misplaced confidence acted throughout in concert with herhalf-brother; that it was a conspiracy between them; and that they shared theprofits."
"I wonder he didn't marry her and get all the property," said I.
"He may have been married already, and her cruel mortification may have been apart of her half-brother's scheme," said Herbert. "Mind! I don't know that."
"What became of the two men?" I asked, after again considering the subject.
"They fell into deeper shame and degradation—if there can be deeper—and ruin."
"Are they alive now?"
"I don't know."
"You said just now that Estella was not related to Miss Havisham, but adopted.When adopted?"
Herbert shrugged his shoulders. "There has always been an Estella, since I haveheard of a Miss Havisham. I know no more. And now, Handel," said he, finallythrowing off the story as it were, "there is a perfectly open understandingbetween us. All that I know about Miss Havisham, you know."
"And all that I know," I retorted, "you know."
"I fully believe it. So there can be no competition or perplexity between youand me. And as to the condition on which you hold your advancement inlife,—namely, that you are not to inquire or discuss to whom you owe it,—youmay be very sure that it will never be encroached upon, or even approached, byme, or by any one belonging to me."
In truth, he said this with so much delicacy, that I felt the subject donewith, even though I should be under his father's roof for years and years tocome. Yet he said it with so much meaning, too, that I felt he as perfectlyunderstood Miss Havisham to be my benefactress, as I understood the factmyself.
It had not occurred to me before, that he had led up to the theme for thepurpose of clearing it out of our way; but we were so much the lighter andeasier for having broached it, that I now perceived this to be the case. Wewere very gay and sociable, and I asked him, in the course of conversation,what he was? He replied, "A capitalist,—an Insurer of Ships." I suppose he sawme glancing about the room in search of some tokens of Shipping, or capital,for he added, "In the City."
I had grand ideas of the wealth and importance of Insurers of Ships in theCity, and I began to think with awe of having laid a young Insurer on his back,blackened his enterprising eye, and cut his responsible head open. But againthere came upon me, for my relief, that odd impression that Herbert Pocketwould never be very successful or rich.
"I shall not rest satisfied with merely employing my capital in insuring ships.I shall buy up some good Life Assurance shares, and cut into the Direction. Ishall also do a little in the mining way. None of these things will interferewith my chartering a few thousand tons on my own account. I think I shalltrade," said he, leaning back in his chair, "to the East Indies, for silks,shawls, spices, dyes, drugs, and precious woods. It's an interesting trade."
"And the profits are large?" said I.
"Tremendous!" said he.
I wavered again, and began to think here were greater expectations than my own.




"I think I shall trade, also," said he, putting his thumbs in his waist-coatpockets, "to the West Indies, for sugar, tobacco, and rum. Also to Ceylon,especially for elephants' tusks."
"You will want a good many ships," said I.
"A perfect fleet," said he.
Quite overpowered by the magnificence of these transactions, I asked him wherethe ships he insured mostly traded to at present?
"I haven't begun insuring yet," he replied. "I am looking about me."
Somehow, that pursuit seemed more in keeping with Barnard's Inn. I said (in atone of conviction), "Ah-h!"
"Yes. I am in a counting-house, and looking about me."
"Is a counting-house profitable?" I asked.
"To—do you mean to the young fellow who's in it?" he asked, in reply.
"Yes; to you."
"Why, n-no; not to me." He said this with the air of one carefully reckoning upand striking a balance. "Not directly profitable. That is, it doesn't pay meanything, and I have to—keep myself."
This certainly had not a profitable appearance, and I shook my head as if Iwould imply that it would be difficult to lay by much accumulative capital fromsuch a source of income.
"But the thing is," said Herbert Pocket, "that you look about you.That's the grand thing. You are in a counting-house, you know, and youlook about you."
It struck me as a singular implication that you couldn't be out of acounting-house, you know, and look about you; but I silently deferred to hisexperience.
"Then the time comes," said Herbert, "when you see your opening. And you go in,and you swoop upon it and you make your capital, and then there you are! Whenyou have once made your capital, you have nothing to do but employ it."
This was very like his way of conducting that encounter in the garden; verylike. His manner of bearing his poverty, too, exactly corresponded to hismanner of bearing that defeat. It seemed to me that he took all blows andbuffets now with just the same air as he had taken mine then. It was evidentthat he had nothing around him but the simplest necessaries, for everythingthat I remarked upon turned out to have been sent in on my account from thecoffee-house or somewhere else.
Yet, having already made his fortune in his own mind, he was so unassuming withit that I felt quite grateful to him for not being puffed up. It was a pleasantaddition to his naturally pleasant ways, and we got on famously. In the eveningwe went out for a walk in the streets, and went half-price to the Theatre; andnext day we went to church at Westminster Abbey, and in the afternoon we walkedin the Parks; and I wondered who shod all the horses there, and wished Joe did.
On a moderate computation, it was many months, that Sunday, since I had leftJoe and Biddy. The space interposed between myself and them partook of thatexpansion, and our marshes were any distance off. That I could have been at ourold church in my old church-going clothes, on the very last Sunday that everwas, seemed a combination of impossibilities, geographical and social, solarand lunar. Yet in the London streets so crowded with people and so brilliantlylighted in the dusk of evening, there were depressing hints of reproaches forthat I had put the poor old kitchen at home so far away; and in the dead ofnight, the footsteps of some incapable impostor of a porter mooning aboutBarnard's Inn, under pretence of watching it, fell hollow on my heart.
On the Monday morning at a quarter before nine, Herbert went to thecounting-house to report himself,—to look about him, too, I suppose,—and I borehim company. He was to come away in an hour or two to attend me to Hammersmith,and I was to wait about for him. It appeared to me that the eggs from whichyoung Insurers were hatched were incubated in dust and heat, like the eggs ofostriches, judging from the places to which those incipient giants repaired ona Monday morning. Nor did the counting-house where Herbert assisted, show in myeyes as at all a good Observatory; being a back second floor up a yard, of agrimy presence in all particulars, and with a look into another back secondfloor, rather than a look out.
I waited about until it was noon, and I went upon 'Change, and I saw fluey mensitting there under the bills about shipping, whom I took to be greatmerchants, though I couldn't understand why they should all be out of spirits.When Herbert came, we went and had lunch at a celebrated house which I thenquite venerated, but now believe to have been the most abject superstition inEurope, and where I could not help noticing, even then, that there was muchmore gravy on the tablecloths and knives and waiters' clothes, than in thesteaks. This collation disposed of at a moderate price (considering the grease,which was not charged for), we went back to Barnard's Inn and got my littleportmanteau, and then took coach for Hammersmith. We arrived there at two orthree o'clock in the afternoon, and had very little way to walk to Mr. Pocket'shouse. Lifting the latch of a gate, we passed direct into a little gardenoverlooking the river, where Mr. Pocket's children were playing about. Andunless I deceive myself on a point where my interests or prepossessions arecertainly not concerned, I saw that Mr. and Mrs. Pocket's children were notgrowing up or being brought up, but were tumbling up.
Mrs. Pocket was sitting on a garden chair under a tree, reading, with her legsupon another garden chair; and Mrs. Pocket's two nurse-maids were looking aboutthem while the children played. "Mamma," said Herbert, "this is young Mr. Pip."Upon which Mrs. Pocket received me with an appearance of amiable dignity.
"Master Alick and Miss Jane," cried one of the nurses to two of the children,"if you go a bouncing up against them bushes you'll fall over into the riverand be drownded, and what'll your pa say then?"
At the same time this nurse picked up Mrs. Pocket's handkerchief, and said, "Ifthat don't make six times you've dropped it, Mum!" Upon which Mrs. Pocketlaughed and said, "Thank you, Flopson," and settling herself in one chair only,resumed her book. Her countenance immediately assumed a knitted and intentexpression as if she had been reading for a week, but before she could haveread half a dozen lines, she fixed her eyes upon me, and said, "I hope yourmamma is quite well?" This unexpected inquiry put me into such a difficultythat I began saying in the absurdest way that if there had been any such personI had no doubt she would have been quite well and would have been very muchobliged and would have sent her compliments, when the nurse came to my rescue.
"Well!" she cried, picking up the pocket-handkerchief, "if that don't makeseven times! What ARE you a-doing of this afternoon, Mum!" Mrs.Pocket received her property, at first with a look of unutterable surprise asif she had never seen it before, and then with a laugh of recognition, andsaid, "Thank you, Flopson," and forgot me, and went on reading.
I found, now I had leisure to count them, that there were no fewer than sixlittle Pockets present, in various stages of tumbling up. I had scarcelyarrived at the total when a seventh was heard, as in the region of air, wailingdolefully.
"If there ain't Baby!" said Flopson, appearing to think it most surprising."Make haste up, Millers."
Millers, who was the other nurse, retired into the house, and by degrees thechild's wailing was hushed and stopped, as if it were a young ventriloquistwith something in its mouth. Mrs. Pocket read all the time, and I was curiousto know what the book could be.
We were waiting, I supposed, for Mr. Pocket to come out to us; at any rate wewaited there, and so I had an opportunity of observing the remarkable familyphenomenon that whenever any of the children strayed near Mrs. Pocket in theirplay, they always tripped themselves up and tumbled over her,—always very muchto her momentary astonishment, and their own more enduring lamentation. I wasat a loss to account for this surprising circumstance, and could not helpgiving my mind to speculations about it, until by and by Millers came down withthe baby, which baby was handed to Flopson, which Flopson was handing it toMrs. Pocket, when she too went fairly head foremost over Mrs. Pocket, baby andall, and was caught by Herbert and myself.
"Gracious me, Flopson!" said Mrs. Pocket, looking off her book for a moment,"everybody's tumbling!"
"Gracious you, indeed, Mum!" returned Flopson, very red in the face; "what haveyou got there?"
"I got here, Flopson?" asked Mrs. Pocket.
"Why, if it ain't your footstool!" cried Flopson. "And if you keep it underyour skirts like that, who's to help tumbling? Here! Take the baby, Mum, andgive me your book."
Mrs. Pocket acted on the advice, and inexpertly danced the infant a little inher lap, while the other children played about it. This had lasted but a veryshort time, when Mrs. Pocket issued summary orders that they were all to betaken into the house for a nap. Thus I made the second discovery on that firstoccasion, that the nurture of the little Pockets consisted of alternatelytumbling up and lying down.
Under these circumstances, when Flopson and Millers had got the children intothe house, like a little flock of sheep, and Mr. Pocket came out of it to makemy acquaintance, I was not much surprised to find that Mr. Pocket was agentleman with a rather perplexed expression of face, and with his very greyhair disordered on his head, as if he didn't quite see his way to puttinganything straight.
