
Chapter XXIII.
Mr.Pocket said he was glad to see me, and he hoped I was not sorry to see him."For, I really am not," he added, with his son's smile, "an alarmingpersonage." He was a young-looking man, in spite of his perplexities and hisvery grey hair, and his manner seemed quite natural. I use the word natural, inthe sense of its being unaffected; there was something comic in his distraughtway, as though it would have been downright ludicrous but for his ownperception that it was very near being so. When he had talked with me a little,he said to Mrs. Pocket, with a rather anxious contraction of his eyebrows,which were black and handsome, "Belinda, I hope you have welcomed Mr. Pip?" Andshe looked up from her book, and said, "Yes." She then smiled upon me in anabsent state of mind, and asked me if I liked the taste of orange-flower water?As the question had no bearing, near or remote, on any foregone or subsequenttransaction, I consider it to have been thrown out, like her previousapproaches, in general conversational condescension.
I found out within a few hours, and may mention at once, that Mrs. Pocket wasthe only daughter of a certain quite accidental deceased Knight, who hadinvented for himself a conviction that his deceased father would have been madea Baronet but for somebody's determined opposition arising out of entirelypersonal motives,—I forget whose, if I ever knew,—the Sovereign's, the PrimeMinister's, the Lord Chancellor's, the Archbishop of Canterbury's,anybody's,—and had tacked himself on to the nobles of the earth in right ofthis quite supposititious fact. I believe he had been knighted himself forstorming the English grammar at the point of the pen, in a desperate addressengrossed on vellum, on the occasion of the laying of the first stone of somebuilding or other, and for handing some Royal Personage either the trowel orthe mortar. Be that as it may, he had directed Mrs. Pocket to be brought upfrom her cradle as one who in the nature of things must marry a title, and whowas to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domestic knowledge.
So successful a watch and ward had been established over the young lady by thisjudicious parent, that she had grown up highly ornamental, but perfectlyhelpless and useless. With her character thus happily formed, in the firstbloom of her youth she had encountered Mr. Pocket: who was also in the firstbloom of youth, and not quite decided whether to mount to the Woolsack, or toroof himself in with a mitre. As his doing the one or the other was a merequestion of time, he and Mrs. Pocket had taken Time by the forelock (when, tojudge from its length, it would seem to have wanted cutting), and had marriedwithout the knowledge of the judicious parent. The judicious parent, havingnothing to bestow or withhold but his blessing, had handsomely settled thatdower upon them after a short struggle, and had informed Mr. Pocket that hiswife was "a treasure for a Prince." Mr. Pocket had invested the Prince'streasure in the ways of the world ever since, and it was supposed to havebrought him in but indifferent interest. Still, Mrs. Pocket was in general theobject of a queer sort of respectful pity, because she had not married a title;while Mr. Pocket was the object of a queer sort of forgiving reproach, becausehe had never got one.
Mr. Pocket took me into the house and showed me my room: which was a pleasantone, and so furnished as that I could use it with comfort for my own privatesitting-room. He then knocked at the doors of two other similar rooms, andintroduced me to their occupants, by name Drummle and Startop. Drummle, anold-looking young man of a heavy order of architecture, was whistling. Startop,younger in years and appearance, was reading and holding his head, as if hethought himself in danger of exploding it with too strong a charge ofknowledge.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had such a noticeable air of being in somebody else'shands, that I wondered who really was in possession of the house and let themlive there, until I found this unknown power to be the servants. It was asmooth way of going on, perhaps, in respect of saving trouble; but it had theappearance of being expensive, for the servants felt it a duty they owed tothemselves to be nice in their eating and drinking, and to keep a deal ofcompany downstairs. They allowed a very liberal table to Mr. and Mrs. Pocket,yet it always appeared to me that by far the best part of the house to haveboarded in would have been the kitchen,—always supposing the boarder capable ofself-defence, for, before I had been there a week, a neighbouring lady withwhom the family were personally unacquainted, wrote in to say that she had seenMillers slapping the baby. This greatly distressed Mrs. Pocket, who burst intotears on receiving the note, and said that it was an extraordinary thing thatthe neighbours couldn't mind their own business.
By degrees I learnt, and chiefly from Herbert, that Mr. Pocket had beeneducated at Harrow and at Cambridge, where he had distinguished himself; butthat when he had had the happiness of marrying Mrs. Pocket very early in life,he had impaired his prospects and taken up the calling of a Grinder. Aftergrinding a number of dull blades,—of whom it was remarkable that their fathers,when influential, were always going to help him to preferment, but alwaysforgot to do it when the blades had left the Grindstone,—he had wearied of thatpoor work and had come to London. Here, after gradually failing in loftierhopes, he had "read" with divers who had lacked opportunities or neglectedthem, and had refurbished divers others for special occasions, and had turnedhis acquirements to the account of literary compilation and correction, and onsuch means, added to some very moderate private resources, still maintained thehouse I saw.
Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had a toady neighbour; a widow lady of that highlysympathetic nature that she agreed with everybody, blessed everybody, and shedsmiles and tears on everybody, according to circumstances. This lady's name wasMrs. Coiler, and I had the honour of taking her down to dinner on the day of myinstallation. She gave me to understand on the stairs, that it was a blow todear Mrs. Pocket that dear Mr. Pocket should be under the necessity ofreceiving gentlemen to read with him. That did not extend to me, she told me ina gush of love and confidence (at that time, I had known her something lessthan five minutes); if they were all like Me, it would be quite another thing.
"But dear Mrs. Pocket," said Mrs. Coiler, "after her early disappointment (notthat dear Mr. Pocket was to blame in that), requires so much luxury andelegance—"
"Yes, ma'am," I said, to stop her, for I was afraid she was going to cry.
"And she is of so aristocratic a disposition—"
"Yes, ma'am," I said again, with the same object as before.
"—That it is hard," said Mrs. Coiler, "to have dear Mr. Pocket's timeand attention diverted from dear Mrs. Pocket."
I could not help thinking that it might be harder if the butcher's time andattention were diverted from dear Mrs. Pocket; but I said nothing, and indeedhad enough to do in keeping a bashful watch upon my company manners.
It came to my knowledge, through what passed between Mrs. Pocket and Drummlewhile I was attentive to my knife and fork, spoon, glasses, and otherinstruments of self-destruction, that Drummle, whose Christian name wasBentley, was actually the next heir but one to a baronetcy. It further appearedthat the book I had seen Mrs. Pocket reading in the garden was all abouttitles, and that she knew the exact date at which her grandpapa would have comeinto the book, if he ever had come at all. Drummle didn't say much, but in hislimited way (he struck me as a sulky kind of fellow) he spoke as one of theelect, and recognised Mrs. Pocket as a woman and a sister. No one butthemselves and Mrs. Coiler the toady neighbour showed any interest in this partof the conversation, and it appeared to me that it was painful to Herbert; butit promised to last a long time, when the page came in with the announcement ofa domestic affliction. It was, in effect, that the cook had mislaid the beef.To my unutterable amazement, I now, for the first time, saw Mr. Pocket relievehis mind by going through a performance that struck me as very extraordinary,but which made no impression on anybody else, and with which I soon became asfamiliar as the rest. He laid down the carving-knife and fork,—being engaged incarving, at the moment,—put his two hands into his disturbed hair, and appearedto make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it. When he had donethis, and had not lifted himself up at all, he quietly went on with what he wasabout.
Mrs. Coiler then changed the subject and began to flatter me. I liked it for afew moments, but she flattered me so very grossly that the pleasure was soonover. She had a serpentine way of coming close at me when she pretended to bevitally interested in the friends and localities I had left, which wasaltogether snaky and fork-tongued; and when she made an occasional bounce uponStartop (who said very little to her), or upon Drummle (who said less), Irather envied them for being on the opposite side of the table.
After dinner the children were introduced, and Mrs. Coiler made admiringcomments on their eyes, noses, and legs,—a sagacious way of improving theirminds. There were four little girls, and two little boys, besides the baby whomight have been either, and the baby's next successor who was as yet neither.They were brought in by Flopson and Millers, much as though those twonon-commissioned officers had been recruiting somewhere for children and hadenlisted these, while Mrs. Pocket looked at the young Nobles that ought to havebeen as if she rather thought she had had the pleasure of inspecting thembefore, but didn't quite know what to make of them.
"Here! Give me your fork, Mum, and take the baby," said Flopson. "Don't take itthat way, or you'll get its head under the table."
Thus advised, Mrs. Pocket took it the other way, and got its head upon thetable; which was announced to all present by a prodigious concussion.
"Dear, dear! Give it me back, Mum," said Flopson; "and Miss Jane, come anddance to baby, do!"
One of the little girls, a mere mite who seemed to have prematurely taken uponherself some charge of the others, stepped out of her place by me, and dancedto and from the baby until it left off crying, and laughed. Then, all thechildren laughed, and Mr. Pocket (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured tolift himself up by the hair) laughed, and we all laughed and were glad.
Flopson, by dint of doubling the baby at the joints like a Dutch doll, then gotit safely into Mrs. Pocket's lap, and gave it the nut-crackers to play with; atthe same time recommending Mrs. Pocket to take notice that the handles of thatinstrument were not likely to agree with its eyes, and sharply charging MissJane to look after the same. Then, the two nurses left the room, and had alively scuffle on the staircase with a dissipated page who had waited atdinner, and who had clearly lost half his buttons at the gaming-table.
I was made very uneasy in my mind by Mrs. Pocket's falling into a discussionwith Drummle respecting two baronetcies, while she ate a sliced orange steepedin sugar and wine, and, forgetting all about the baby on her lap, who did mostappalling things with the nut-crackers. At length little Jane, perceiving itsyoung brains to be imperilled, softly left her place, and with many smallartifices coaxed the dangerous weapon away. Mrs. Pocket finishing her orange atabout the same time, and not approving of this, said to Jane,—
"You naughty child, how dare you? Go and sit down this instant!"
"Mamma dear," lisped the little girl, "baby ood have put hith eyeth out."
"How dare you tell me so?" retorted Mrs. Pocket. "Go and sit down in your chairthis moment!"
Mrs. Pocket's dignity was so crushing, that I felt quite abashed, as if Imyself had done something to rouse it.
"Belinda," remonstrated Mr. Pocket, from the other end of the table, "how canyou be so unreasonable? Jane only interfered for the protection of baby."
"I will not allow anybody to interfere," said Mrs. Pocket. "I am surprised,Matthew, that you should expose me to the affront of interference."
"Good God!" cried Mr. Pocket, in an outbreak of desolate desperation. "Areinfants to be nut-crackered into their tombs, and is nobody to save them?"
"I will not be interfered with by Jane," said Mrs. Pocket, with a majesticglance at that innocent little offender. "I hope I know my poor grandpapa'sposition. Jane, indeed!"
Mr. Pocket got his hands in his hair again, and this time really did lifthimself some inches out of his chair. "Hear this!" he helplessly exclaimed tothe elements. "Babies are to be nut-crackered dead, for people's poorgrandpapa's positions!" Then he let himself down again, and became silent.
We all looked awkwardly at the tablecloth while this was going on. A pausesucceeded, during which the honest and irrepressible baby made a series ofleaps and crows at little Jane, who appeared to me to be the only member of thefamily (irrespective of servants) with whom it had any decided acquaintance.
"Mr. Drummle," said Mrs. Pocket, "will you ring for Flopson? Jane, youundutiful little thing, go and lie down. Now, baby darling, come with ma!"
The baby was the soul of honour, and protested with all its might. It doubleditself up the wrong way over Mrs. Pocket's arm, exhibited a pair of knittedshoes and dimpled ankles to the company in lieu of its soft face, and wascarried out in the highest state of mutiny. And it gained its point after all,for I saw it through the window within a few minutes, being nursed by littleJane.
It happened that the other five children were left behind at the dinner-table,through Flopson's having some private engagement, and their not being anybodyelse's business. I thus became aware of the mutual relations between them andMr. Pocket, which were exemplified in the following manner. Mr. Pocket, withthe normal perplexity of his face heightened and his hair rumpled, looked atthem for some minutes, as if he couldn't make out how they came to be boardingand lodging in that establishment, and why they hadn't been billeted by Natureon somebody else. Then, in a distant Missionary way he asked them certainquestions,—as why little Joe had that hole in his frill, who said, Pa, Flopsonwas going to mend it when she had time,—and how little Fanny came by thatwhitlow, who said, Pa, Millers was going to poultice it when she didn't forget.Then, he melted into parental tenderness, and gave them a shilling apiece andtold them to go and play; and then as they went out, with one very strongeffort to lift himself up by the hair he dismissed the hopeless subject.
In the evening there was rowing on the river. As Drummle and Startop had each aboat, I resolved to set up mine, and to cut them both out. I was pretty good atmost exercises in which country boys are adepts, but as I was conscious ofwanting elegance of style for the Thames,—not to say for other waters,—I atonce engaged to place myself under the tuition of the winner of a prize-wherrywho plied at our stairs, and to whom I was introduced by my new allies. Thispractical authority confused me very much by saying I had the arm of ablacksmith. If he could have known how nearly the compliment lost him hispupil, I doubt if he would have paid it.
There was a supper-tray after we got home at night, and I think we should allhave enjoyed ourselves, but for a rather disagreeable domestic occurrence. Mr.Pocket was in good spirits, when a housemaid came in, and said, "If you please,sir, I should wish to speak to you."
"Speak to your master?" said Mrs. Pocket, whose dignity was roused again. "Howcan you think of such a thing? Go and speak to Flopson. Or speak to me—at someother time."
"Begging your pardon, ma'am," returned the housemaid, "I should wish to speakat once, and to speak to master."
Hereupon, Mr. Pocket went out of the room, and we made the best of ourselvesuntil he came back.
"This is a pretty thing, Belinda!" said Mr. Pocket, returning with acountenance expressive of grief and despair. "Here's the cook lying insensiblydrunk on the kitchen floor, with a large bundle of fresh butter made up in thecupboard ready to sell for grease!"
Mrs. Pocket instantly showed much amiable emotion, and said, "This is thatodious Sophia's doing!"
"What do you mean, Belinda?" demanded Mr. Pocket.
"Sophia has told you," said Mrs. Pocket. "Did I not see her with my own eyesand hear her with my own ears, come into the room just now and ask to speak toyou?"
"But has she not taken me downstairs, Belinda," returned Mr. Pocket, "and shownme the woman, and the bundle too?"
"And do you defend her, Matthew," said Mrs. Pocket, "for making mischief?"
Mr. Pocket uttered a dismal groan.
"Am I, grandpapa's granddaughter, to be nothing in the house?" said Mrs.Pocket. "Besides, the cook has always been a very nice respectful woman, andsaid in the most natural manner when she came to look after the situation, thatshe felt I was born to be a Duchess."
There was a sofa where Mr. Pocket stood, and he dropped upon it in the attitudeof the Dying Gladiator. Still in that attitude he said, with a hollow voice,"Good night, Mr. Pip," when I deemed it advisable to go to bed and leave him.
