
Chapter XXIV.
Aftertwo or three days, when I had established myself in my room and had gonebackwards and forwards to London several times, and had ordered all I wanted ofmy tradesmen, Mr. Pocket and I had a long talk together. He knew more of myintended career than I knew myself, for he referred to his having been told byMr. Jaggers that I was not designed for any profession, and that I should bewell enough educated for my destiny if I could "hold my own" with the averageof young men in prosperous circumstances. I acquiesced, of course, knowingnothing to the contrary.
He advised my attending certain places in London, for the acquisition of suchmere rudiments as I wanted, and my investing him with the functions ofexplainer and director of all my studies. He hoped that with intelligentassistance I should meet with little to discourage me, and should soon be ableto dispense with any aid but his. Through his way of saying this, and much moreto similar purpose, he placed himself on confidential terms with me in anadmirable manner; and I may state at once that he was always so zealous andhonourable in fulfilling his compact with me, that he made me zealous andhonourable in fulfilling mine with him. If he had shown indifference as amaster, I have no doubt I should have returned the compliment as a pupil; hegave me no such excuse, and each of us did the other justice. Nor did I everregard him as having anything ludicrous about him—or anything but what wasserious, honest, and good—in his tutor communication with me.
When these points were settled, and so far carried out as that I had begun towork in earnest, it occurred to me that if I could retain my bedroom inBarnard's Inn, my life would be agreeably varied, while my manners would benone the worse for Herbert's society. Mr. Pocket did not object to thisarrangement, but urged that before any step could possibly be taken in it, itmust be submitted to my guardian. I felt that this delicacy arose out of theconsideration that the plan would save Herbert some expense, so I went off toLittle Britain and imparted my wish to Mr. Jaggers.
"If I could buy the furniture now hired for me," said I, "and one or two otherlittle things, I should be quite at home there."
"Go it!" said Mr. Jaggers, with a short laugh. "I told you you'd get on. Well!How much do you want?"
I said I didn't know how much.
"Come!" retorted Mr. Jaggers. "How much? Fifty pounds?"
"O, not nearly so much."
"Five pounds?" said Mr. Jaggers.
This was such a great fall, that I said in discomfiture, "O, more than that."
"More than that, eh!" retorted Mr. Jaggers, lying in wait for me, with hishands in his pockets, his head on one side, and his eyes on the wall behind me;"how much more?"
"It is so difficult to fix a sum," said I, hesitating.
"Come!" said Mr. Jaggers. "Let's get at it. Twice five; will that do? Threetimes five; will that do? Four times five; will that do?"
I said I thought that would do handsomely.
"Four times five will do handsomely, will it?" said Mr. Jaggers, knitting hisbrows. "Now, what do you make of four times five?"
"What do I make of it?"
"Ah!" said Mr. Jaggers; "how much?"
"I suppose you make it twenty pounds," said I, smiling.
"Never mind what I make it, my friend," observed Mr. Jaggers, with aknowing and contradictory toss of his head. "I want to know what youmake it."
"Twenty pounds, of course."
"Wemmick!" said Mr. Jaggers, opening his office door. "Take Mr. Pip's writtenorder, and pay him twenty pounds."
This strongly marked way of doing business made a strongly marked impression onme, and that not of an agreeable kind. Mr. Jaggers never laughed; but he woregreat bright creaking boots, and, in poising himself on these boots, with hislarge head bent down and his eyebrows joined together, awaiting an answer, hesometimes caused the boots to creak, as if they laughed in a dry andsuspicious way. As he happened to go out now, and as Wemmick was brisk andtalkative, I said to Wemmick that I hardly knew what to make of Mr. Jaggers'smanner.
"Tell him that, and he'll take it as a compliment," answered Wemmick; "he don'tmean that you should know what to make of it.—Oh!" for I lookedsurprised, "it's not personal; it's professional: only professional."
Wemmick was at his desk, lunching—and crunching—on a dry hard biscuit; piecesof which he threw from time to time into his slit of a mouth, as if he wereposting them.
"Always seems to me," said Wemmick, "as if he had set a man-trap and waswatching it. Suddenly—click—you're caught!"
Without remarking that man-traps were not among the amenities of life, I said Isupposed he was very skilful?
"Deep," said Wemmick, "as Australia." Pointing with his pen at the officefloor, to express that Australia was understood, for the purposes of thefigure, to be symmetrically on the opposite spot of the globe. "If there wasanything deeper," added Wemmick, bringing his pen to paper, "he'd be it."
Then, I said I supposed he had a fine business, and Wemmick said, "Ca-pi-tal!"Then I asked if there were many clerks? to which he replied,—
"We don't run much into clerks, because there's only one Jaggers, and peoplewon't have him at second hand. There are only four of us. Would you like to see'em? You are one of us, as I may say."
I accepted the offer. When Mr. Wemmick had put all the biscuit into the post,and had paid me my money from a cash-box in a safe, the key of which safe hekept somewhere down his back and produced from his coat-collar like aniron-pigtail, we went upstairs. The house was dark and shabby, and the greasyshoulders that had left their mark in Mr. Jaggers's room seemed to have beenshuffling up and down the staircase for years. In the front first floor, aclerk who looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher—a large pale,puffed, swollen man—was attentively engaged with three or four people of shabbyappearance, whom he treated as unceremoniously as everybody seemed to betreated who contributed to Mr. Jaggers's coffers. "Getting evidence together,"said Mr. Wemmick, as we came out, "for the Bailey." In the room over that, alittle flabby terrier of a clerk with dangling hair (his cropping seemed tohave been forgotten when he was a puppy) was similarly engaged with a man withweak eyes, whom Mr. Wemmick presented to me as a smelter who kept his potalways boiling, and who would melt me anything I pleased,—and who was in anexcessive white-perspiration, as if he had been trying his art on himself. In aback room, a high-shouldered man with a face-ache tied up in dirty flannel, whowas dressed in old black clothes that bore the appearance of having been waxed,was stooping over his work of making fair copies of the notes of the other twogentlemen, for Mr. Jaggers's own use.
This was all the establishment. When we went downstairs again, Wemmick led meinto my guardian's room, and said, "This you've seen already."
"Pray," said I, as the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them caughtmy sight again, "whose likenesses are those?"
"These?" said Wemmick, getting upon a chair, and blowing the dust off thehorrible heads before bringing them down. "These are two celebrated ones.Famous clients of ours that got us a world of credit. This chap (why you musthave come down in the night and been peeping into the inkstand, to get thisblot upon your eyebrow, you old rascal!) murdered his master, and, consideringthat he wasn't brought up to evidence, didn't plan it badly."
"Is it like him?" I asked, recoiling from the brute, as Wemmick spat upon hiseyebrow and gave it a rub with his sleeve.
"Like him? It's himself, you know. The cast was made in Newgate, directly afterhe was taken down. You had a particular fancy for me, hadn't you, Old Artful?"said Wemmick. He then explained this affectionate apostrophe, by touching hisbrooch representing the lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urnupon it, and saying, "Had it made for me, express!"
"Is the lady anybody?" said I.
"No," returned Wemmick. "Only his game. (You liked your bit of game, didn'tyou?) No; deuce a bit of a lady in the case, Mr. Pip, except one,—and shewasn't of this slender lady-like sort, and you wouldn't have caught herlooking after this urn, unless there was something to drink in it." Wemmick'sattention being thus directed to his brooch, he put down the cast, and polishedthe brooch with his pocket-handkerchief.
"Did that other creature come to the same end?" I asked. "He has the samelook."
"You're right," said Wemmick; "it's the genuine look. Much as if one nostrilwas caught up with a horse-hair and a little fish-hook. Yes, he came to thesame end; quite the natural end here, I assure you. He forged wills, this bladedid, if he didn't also put the supposed testators to sleep too. You were agentlemanly Cove, though" (Mr. Wemmick was again apostrophising), "and you saidyou could write Greek. Yah, Bounceable! What a liar you were! I never met sucha liar as you!" Before putting his late friend on his shelf again, Wemmicktouched the largest of his mourning rings and said, "Sent out to buy it for me,only the day before."
While he was putting up the other cast and coming down from the chair, thethought crossed my mind that all his personal jewelry was derived from likesources. As he had shown no diffidence on the subject, I ventured on theliberty of asking him the question, when he stood before me, dusting his hands.
"O yes," he returned, "these are all gifts of that kind. One brings another,you see; that's the way of it. I always take 'em. They're curiosities. Andthey're property. They may not be worth much, but, after all, they're propertyand portable. It don't signify to you with your brilliant lookout, but as tomyself, my guiding-star always is, ‘Get hold of portable property'."
When I had rendered homage to this light, he went on to say, in a friendlymanner:—
"If at any odd time when you have nothing better to do, you wouldn't mindcoming over to see me at Walworth, I could offer you a bed, and I shouldconsider it an honour. I have not much to show you; but such two or threecuriosities as I have got you might like to look over; and I am fond of a bitof garden and a summer-house."
I said I should be delighted to accept his hospitality.
"Thankee," said he; "then we'll consider that it's to come off, when convenientto you. Have you dined with Mr. Jaggers yet?"
"Not yet."
"Well," said Wemmick, "he'll give you wine, and good wine. I'll give you punch,and not bad punch. And now I'll tell you something. When you go to dine withMr. Jaggers, look at his housekeeper."
"Shall I see something very uncommon?"
"Well," said Wemmick, "you'll see a wild beast tamed. Not so very uncommon,you'll tell me. I reply, that depends on the original wildness of the beast,and the amount of taming. It won't lower your opinion of Mr. Jaggers's powers.Keep your eye on it."
I told him I would do so, with all the interest and curiosity that hispreparation awakened. As I was taking my departure, he asked me if I would liketo devote five minutes to seeing Mr. Jaggers "at it?"
For several reasons, and not least because I didn't clearly know what Mr.Jaggers would be found to be "at," I replied in the affirmative. We dived intothe City, and came up in a crowded police-court, where a blood-relation (in themurderous sense) of the deceased, with the fanciful taste in brooches, wasstanding at the bar, uncomfortably chewing something; while my guardian had awoman under examination or cross-examination,—I don't know which,—and wasstriking her, and the bench, and everybody present, with awe. If anybody, ofwhatsoever degree, said a word that he didn't approve of, he instantly requiredto have it "taken down." If anybody wouldn't make an admission, he said, "I'llhave it out of you!" and if anybody made an admission, he said, "Now I have gotyou!" The magistrates shivered under a single bite of his finger. Thieves andthief-takers hung in dread rapture on his words, and shrank when a hair of hiseyebrows turned in their direction. Which side he was on I couldn't make out,for he seemed to me to be grinding the whole place in a mill; I only know thatwhen I stole out on tiptoe, he was not on the side of the bench; for, he wasmaking the legs of the old gentleman who presided, quite convulsive under thetable, by his denunciations of his conduct as the representative of British lawand justice in that chair that day.
