
Chapter XXV.
Bentley Drummle, who was so sulky a fellow that he even took upa book as if its writer had done him an injury, did not take up an acquaintancein a more agreeable spirit. Heavy in figure, movement, and comprehension,—inthe sluggish complexion of his face, and in the large, awkward tongue thatseemed to loll about in his mouth as he himself lolled about in a room,—he wasidle, proud, niggardly, reserved, and suspicious. He came of rich people downin Somersetshire, who had nursed this combination of qualities until they madethe discovery that it was just of age and a blockhead. Thus, Bentley Drummlehad come to Mr. Pocket when he was a head taller than that gentleman, and halfa dozen heads thicker than most gentlemen.
Startop had been spoilt by a weak mother and kept at home when he ought to havebeen at school, but he was devotedly attached to her, and admired her beyondmeasure. He had a woman's delicacy of feature, and was—"as you may see, thoughyou never saw her," said Herbert to me—"exactly like his mother." It was butnatural that I should take to him much more kindly than to Drummle, and that,even in the earliest evenings of our boating, he and I should pull homewardabreast of one another, conversing from boat to boat, while Bentley Drummlecame up in our wake alone, under the overhanging banks and among the rushes. Hewould always creep in-shore like some uncomfortable amphibious creature, evenwhen the tide would have sent him fast upon his way; and I always think of himas coming after us in the dark or by the back-water, when our own two boatswere breaking the sunset or the moonlight in mid-stream.
Herbert was my intimate companion and friend. I presented him with a half-sharein my boat, which was the occasion of his often coming down to Hammersmith; andmy possession of a half-share in his chambers often took me up to London. Weused to walk between the two places at all hours. I have an affection for theroad yet (though it is not so pleasant a road as it was then), formed in theimpressibility of untried youth and hope.
When I had been in Mr. Pocket's family a month or two, Mr. and Mrs. Camillaturned up. Camilla was Mr. Pocket's sister. Georgiana, whom I had seen at MissHavisham's on the same occasion, also turned up. She was a cousin,—anindigestive single woman, who called her rigidity religion, and her liver love.These people hated me with the hatred of cupidity and disappointment. As amatter of course, they fawned upon me in my prosperity with the basestmeanness. Towards Mr. Pocket, as a grown-up infant with no notion of his owninterests, they showed the complacent forbearance I had heard them express.Mrs. Pocket they held in contempt; but they allowed the poor soul to have beenheavily disappointed in life, because that shed a feeble reflected light uponthemselves.
These were the surroundings among which I settled down, and applied myself tomy education. I soon contracted expensive habits, and began to spend an amountof money that within a few short months I should have thought almost fabulous;but through good and evil I stuck to my books. There was no other merit inthis, than my having sense enough to feel my deficiencies. Between Mr. Pocketand Herbert I got on fast; and, with one or the other always at my elbow togive me the start I wanted, and clear obstructions out of my road, I must havebeen as great a dolt as Drummle if I had done less.
I had not seen Mr. Wemmick for some weeks, when I thought I would write him anote and propose to go home with him on a certain evening. He replied that itwould give him much pleasure, and that he would expect me at the office at sixo'clock. Thither I went, and there I found him, putting the key of his safedown his back as the clock struck.
"Did you think of walking down to Walworth?" said he.
"Certainly," said I, "if you approve."
"Very much," was Wemmick's reply, "for I have had my legs under the desk allday, and shall be glad to stretch them. Now, I'll tell you what I have got forsupper, Mr. Pip. I have got a stewed steak,—which is of home preparation,—and acold roast fowl,—which is from the cook's-shop. I think it's tender, becausethe master of the shop was a Juryman in some cases of ours the other day, andwe let him down easy. I reminded him of it when I bought the fowl, and I said,"Pick us out a good one, old Briton, because if we had chosen to keep you inthe box another day or two, we could easily have done it." He said to that,"Let me make you a present of the best fowl in the shop." I let him, of course.As far as it goes, it's property and portable. You don't object to an agedparent, I hope?"
I really thought he was still speaking of the fowl, until he added, "Because Ihave got an aged parent at my place." I then said what politeness required.
"So, you haven't dined with Mr. Jaggers yet?" he pursued, as we walked along.
"Not yet."
"He told me so this afternoon when he heard you were coming. I expect you'llhave an invitation to-morrow. He's going to ask your pals, too. Three of 'em;ain't there?"
Although I was not in the habit of counting Drummle as one of my intimateassociates, I answered, "Yes."
"Well, he's going to ask the whole gang,"—I hardly felt complimented by theword,—"and whatever he gives you, he'll give you good. Don't look forward tovariety, but you'll have excellence. And there's another rum thing in hishouse," proceeded Wemmick, after a moment's pause, as if the remark followed onthe housekeeper understood; "he never lets a door or window be fastened atnight."
"Is he never robbed?"
"That's it!" returned Wemmick. "He says, and gives it out publicly, "I want tosee the man who'll rob me." Lord bless you, I have heard him, a hundredtimes, if I have heard him once, say to regular cracksmen in our front office,"You know where I live; now, no bolt is ever drawn there; why don't you do astroke of business with me? Come; can't I tempt you?" Not a man of them, sir,would be bold enough to try it on, for love or money."
"They dread him so much?" said I.
"Dread him," said Wemmick. "I believe you they dread him. Not but what he'sartful, even in his defiance of them. No silver, sir. Britannia metal, everyspoon."
"So they wouldn't have much," I observed, "even if they—"
"Ah! But he would have much," said Wemmick, cutting me short, "and theyknow it. He'd have their lives, and the lives of scores of 'em. He'd have allhe could get. And it's impossible to say what he couldn't get, if he gave hismind to it."
I was falling into meditation on my guardian's greatness, when Wemmickremarked:—
"As to the absence of plate, that's only his natural depth, you know. A river'sits natural depth, and he's his natural depth. Look at his watch-chain. That'sreal enough."
"It's very massive," said I.
"Massive?" repeated Wemmick. "I think so. And his watch is a gold repeater, andworth a hundred pound if it's worth a penny. Mr. Pip, there are about sevenhundred thieves in this town who know all about that watch; there's not a man,a woman, or a child, among them, who wouldn't identify the smallest link inthat chain, and drop it as if it was red hot, if inveigled into touching it."
At first with such discourse, and afterwards with conversation of a moregeneral nature, did Mr. Wemmick and I beguile the time and the road, until hegave me to understand that we had arrived in the district of Walworth.
It appeared to be a collection of back lanes, ditches, and little gardens, andto present the aspect of a rather dull retirement. Wemmick's house was a littlewooden cottage in the midst of plots of garden, and the top of it was cut outand painted like a battery mounted with guns.
"My own doing," said Wemmick. "Looks pretty; don't it?"
I highly commended it, I think it was the smallest house I ever saw; with thequeerest gothic windows (by far the greater part of them sham), and a gothicdoor almost too small to get in at.
"That's a real flagstaff, you see," said Wemmick, "and on Sundays I run up areal flag. Then look here. After I have crossed this bridge, I hoist itup—so—and cut off the communication."
The bridge was a plank, and it crossed a chasm about four feet wide and twodeep. But it was very pleasant to see the pride with which he hoisted it up andmade it fast; smiling as he did so, with a relish and not merely mechanically.
"At nine o'clock every night, Greenwich time," said Wemmick, "the gun fires.There he is, you see! And when you hear him go, I think you'll say he's aStinger."
The piece of ordnance referred to, was mounted in a separate fortress,constructed of lattice-work. It was protected from the weather by an ingeniouslittle tarpaulin contrivance in the nature of an umbrella.
"Then, at the back," said Wemmick, "out of sight, so as not to impede the ideaof fortifications,—for it's a principle with me, if you have an idea, carry itout and keep it up,—I don't know whether that's your opinion—"
I said, decidedly.
"—At the back, there's a pig, and there are fowls and rabbits; then, I knocktogether my own little frame, you see, and grow cucumbers; and you'll judge atsupper what sort of a salad I can raise. So, sir," said Wemmick, smiling again,but seriously too, as he shook his head, "if you can suppose the little placebesieged, it would hold out a devil of a time in point of provisions."
Then, he conducted me to a bower about a dozen yards off, but which wasapproached by such ingenious twists of path that it took quite a long time toget at; and in this retreat our glasses were already set forth. Our punch wascooling in an ornamental lake, on whose margin the bower was raised. This pieceof water (with an island in the middle which might have been the salad forsupper) was of a circular form, and he had constructed a fountain in it, which,when you set a little mill going and took a cork out of a pipe, played to thatpowerful extent that it made the back of your hand quite wet.
"I am my own engineer, and my own carpenter, and my own plumber, and my owngardener, and my own Jack of all Trades," said Wemmick, in acknowledging mycompliments. "Well; it's a good thing, you know. It brushes the Newgate cobwebsaway, and pleases the Aged. You wouldn't mind being at once introduced to theAged, would you? It wouldn't put you out?"
I expressed the readiness I felt, and we went into the castle. There we found,sitting by a fire, a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful,comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf.
"Well aged parent," said Wemmick, shaking hands with him in a cordial andjocose way, "how am you?"
"All right, John; all right!" replied the old man.
"Here's Mr. Pip, aged parent," said Wemmick, "and I wish you could hear hisname. Nod away at him, Mr. Pip; that's what he likes. Nod away at him, if youplease, like winking!"
"This is a fine place of my son's, sir," cried the old man, while I nodded ashard as I possibly could. "This is a pretty pleasure-ground, sir. This spot andthese beautiful works upon it ought to be kept together by the Nation, after myson's time, for the people's enjoyment."
"You're as proud of it as Punch; ain't you, Aged?" said Wemmick, contemplatingthe old man, with his hard face really softened; "there's a nod foryou;" giving him a tremendous one; "there's another for you;" giving hima still more tremendous one; "you like that, don't you? If you're not tired,Mr. Pip—though I know it's tiring to strangers—will you tip him one more? Youcan't think how it pleases him."
I tipped him several more, and he was in great spirits. We left him bestirringhimself to feed the fowls, and we sat down to our punch in the arbour; whereWemmick told me, as he smoked a pipe, that it had taken him a good many yearsto bring the property up to its present pitch of perfection.
"Is it your own, Mr. Wemmick?"
"O yes," said Wemmick, "I have got hold of it, a bit at a time. It's afreehold, by George!"
"Is it indeed? I hope Mr. Jaggers admires it?"
"Never seen it," said Wemmick. "Never heard of it. Never seen the Aged. Neverheard of him. No; the office is one thing, and private life is another. When Igo into the office, I leave the Castle behind me, and when I come into theCastle, I leave the office behind me. If it's not in any way disagreeable toyou, you'll oblige me by doing the same. I don't wish it professionally spokenabout."
Of course I felt my good faith involved in the observance of his request. Thepunch being very nice, we sat there drinking it and talking, until it wasalmost nine o'clock. "Getting near gun-fire," said Wemmick then, as he laiddown his pipe; "it's the Aged's treat."
Proceeding into the Castle again, we found the Aged heating the poker, withexpectant eyes, as a preliminary to the performance of this great nightlyceremony. Wemmick stood with his watch in his hand until the moment was comefor him to take the red-hot poker from the Aged, and repair to the battery. Hetook it, and went out, and presently the Stinger went off with a Bang thatshook the crazy little box of a cottage as if it must fall to pieces, and madeevery glass and teacup in it ring. Upon this, the Aged—who I believe would havebeen blown out of his arm-chair but for holding on by the elbows—cried outexultingly, "He's fired! I heerd him!" and I nodded at the old gentleman untilit is no figure of speech to declare that I absolutely could not see him.
The interval between that time and supper Wemmick devoted to showing me hiscollection of curiosities. They were mostly of a felonious character;comprising the pen with which a celebrated forgery had been committed, adistinguished razor or two, some locks of hair, and several manuscriptconfessions written under condemnation,—upon which Mr. Wemmick set particularvalue as being, to use his own words, "every one of 'em Lies, sir." These wereagreeably dispersed among small specimens of china and glass, various neattrifles made by the proprietor of the museum, and some tobacco-stoppers carvedby the Aged. They were all displayed in that chamber of the Castle into which Ihad been first inducted, and which served, not only as the general sitting-roombut as the kitchen too, if I might judge from a saucepan on the hob, and abrazen bijou over the fireplace designed for the suspension of a roasting-jack.
There was a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the Aged in theday. When she had laid the supper-cloth, the bridge was lowered to give hermeans of egress, and she withdrew for the night. The supper was excellent; andthough the Castle was rather subject to dry-rot insomuch that it tasted like abad nut, and though the pig might have been farther off, I was heartily pleasedwith my whole entertainment. Nor was there any drawback on my little turretbedroom, beyond there being such a very thin ceiling between me and theflagstaff, that when I lay down on my back in bed, it seemed as if I had tobalance that pole on my forehead all night.
Wemmick was up early in the morning, and I am afraid I heard him cleaning myboots. After that, he fell to gardening, and I saw him from my gothic windowpretending to employ the Aged, and nodding at him in a most devoted manner. Ourbreakfast was as good as the supper, and at half-past eight precisely westarted for Little Britain. By degrees, Wemmick got dryer and harder as we wentalong, and his mouth tightened into a post-office again. At last, when we gotto his place of business and he pulled out his key from his coat-collar, helooked as unconscious of his Walworth property as if the Castle and thedrawbridge and the arbour and the lake and the fountain and the Aged, had allbeen blown into space together by the last discharge of the Stinger.
