
Chapter XXVI.
Itfell out as Wemmick had told me it would, that I had an early opportunity ofcomparing my guardian's establishment with that of his cashier and clerk. Myguardian was in his room, washing his hands with his scented soap, when I wentinto the office from Walworth; and he called me to him, and gave me theinvitation for myself and friends which Wemmick had prepared me to receive. "Noceremony," he stipulated, "and no dinner dress, and say to-morrow." I asked himwhere we should come to (for I had no idea where he lived), and I believe itwas in his general objection to make anything like an admission, that hereplied, "Come here, and I'll take you home with me." I embrace thisopportunity of remarking that he washed his clients off, as if he were asurgeon or a dentist. He had a closet in his room, fitted up for the purpose,which smelt of the scented soap like a perfumer's shop. It had an unusuallylarge jack-towel on a roller inside the door, and he would wash his hands, andwipe them and dry them all over this towel, whenever he came in from a policecourt or dismissed a client from his room. When I and my friends repaired tohim at six o'clock next day, he seemed to have been engaged on a case of adarker complexion than usual, for we found him with his head butted into thiscloset, not only washing his hands, but laving his face and gargling histhroat. And even when he had done all that, and had gone all round thejack-towel, he took out his penknife and scraped the case out of his nailsbefore he put his coat on.
There were some people slinking about as usual when we passed out into thestreet, who were evidently anxious to speak with him; but there was somethingso conclusive in the halo of scented soap which encircled his presence, thatthey gave it up for that day. As we walked along westward, he was recognisedever and again by some face in the crowd of the streets, and whenever thathappened he talked louder to me; but he never otherwise recognised anybody, ortook notice that anybody recognised him.
He conducted us to Gerrard Street, Soho, to a house on the south side of thatstreet. Rather a stately house of its kind, but dolefully in want of painting,and with dirty windows. He took out his key and opened the door, and we allwent into a stone hall, bare, gloomy, and little used. So, up a dark brownstaircase into a series of three dark brown rooms on the first floor. Therewere carved garlands on the panelled walls, and as he stood among them givingus welcome, I know what kind of loops I thought they looked like.
Dinner was laid in the best of these rooms; the second was his dressing-room;the third, his bedroom. He told us that he held the whole house, but rarelyused more of it than we saw. The table was comfortably laid—no silver in theservice, of course—and at the side of his chair was a capacious dumb-waiter,with a variety of bottles and decanters on it, and four dishes of fruit fordessert. I noticed throughout, that he kept everything under his own hand, anddistributed everything himself.
There was a bookcase in the room; I saw from the backs of the books, that theywere about evidence, criminal law, criminal biography, trials, acts ofParliament, and such things. The furniture was all very solid and good, likehis watch-chain. It had an official look, however, and there was nothing merelyornamental to be seen. In a corner was a little table of papers with a shadedlamp: so that he seemed to bring the office home with him in that respect too,and to wheel it out of an evening and fall to work.
As he had scarcely seen my three companions until now,—for he and I had walkedtogether,—he stood on the hearth-rug, after ringing the bell, and took asearching look at them. To my surprise, he seemed at once to be principally ifnot solely interested in Drummle.
"Pip," said he, putting his large hand on my shoulder and moving me to thewindow, "I don't know one from the other. Who's the Spider?"
"The spider?" said I.
"The blotchy, sprawly, sulky fellow."
"That's Bentley Drummle," I replied; "the one with the delicate face isStartop."
Not making the least account of "the one with the delicate face," he returned,"Bentley Drummle is his name, is it? I like the look of that fellow."
He immediately began to talk to Drummle: not at all deterred by his replying inhis heavy reticent way, but apparently led on by it to screw discourse out ofhim. I was looking at the two, when there came between me and them thehousekeeper, with the first dish for the table.
She was a woman of about forty, I supposed,—but I may have thought her youngerthan she was. Rather tall, of a lithe nimble figure, extremely pale, with largefaded eyes, and a quantity of streaming hair. I cannot say whether any diseasedaffection of the heart caused her lips to be parted as if she were panting, andher face to bear a curious expression of suddenness and flutter; but I knowthat I had been to see Macbeth at the theatre, a night or two before, and thather face looked to me as if it were all disturbed by fiery air, like the facesI had seen rise out of the Witches' caldron.
She set the dish on, touched my guardian quietly on the arm with a finger tonotify that dinner was ready, and vanished. We took our seats at the roundtable, and my guardian kept Drummle on one side of him, while Startop sat onthe other. It was a noble dish of fish that the housekeeper had put on table,and we had a joint of equally choice mutton afterwards, and then an equallychoice bird. Sauces, wines, all the accessories we wanted, and all of the best,were given out by our host from his dumb-waiter; and when they had made thecircuit of the table, he always put them back again. Similarly, he dealt usclean plates and knives and forks, for each course, and dropped those justdisused into two baskets on the ground by his chair. No other attendant thanthe housekeeper appeared. She set on every dish; and I always saw in her face,a face rising out of the caldron. Years afterwards, I made a dreadful likenessof that woman, by causing a face that had no other natural resemblance to itthan it derived from flowing hair to pass behind a bowl of flaming spirits in adark room.
Induced to take particular notice of the housekeeper, both by her own strikingappearance and by Wemmick's preparation, I observed that whenever she was inthe room she kept her eyes attentively on my guardian, and that she wouldremove her hands from any dish she put before him, hesitatingly, as if shedreaded his calling her back, and wanted him to speak when she was nigh, if hehad anything to say. I fancied that I could detect in his manner aconsciousness of this, and a purpose of always holding her in suspense.
Dinner went off gayly, and although my guardian seemed to follow rather thanoriginate subjects, I knew that he wrenched the weakest part of ourdispositions out of us. For myself, I found that I was expressing my tendencyto lavish expenditure, and to patronise Herbert, and to boast of my greatprospects, before I quite knew that I had opened my lips. It was so with all ofus, but with no one more than Drummle: the development of whose inclination togird in a grudging and suspicious way at the rest, was screwed out of himbefore the fish was taken off.
It was not then, but when we had got to the cheese, that our conversationturned upon our rowing feats, and that Drummle was rallied for coming up behindof a night in that slow amphibious way of his. Drummle upon this, informed ourhost that he much preferred our room to our company, and that as to skill hewas more than our master, and that as to strength he could scatter us likechaff. By some invisible agency, my guardian wound him up to a pitch littleshort of ferocity about this trifle; and he fell to baring and spanning his armto show how muscular it was, and we all fell to baring and spanning our arms ina ridiculous manner.
Now the housekeeper was at that time clearing the table; my guardian, taking noheed of her, but with the side of his face turned from her, was leaning back inhis chair biting the side of his forefinger and showing an interest in Drummle,that, to me, was quite inexplicable. Suddenly, he clapped his large hand on thehousekeeper's, like a trap, as she stretched it across the table. So suddenlyand smartly did he do this, that we all stopped in our foolish contention.
"If you talk of strength," said Mr. Jaggers, "I'll show you a wrist.Molly, let them see your wrist."
Her entrapped hand was on the table, but she had already put her other handbehind her waist. "Master," she said, in a low voice, with her eyes attentivelyand entreatingly fixed upon him. "Don't."
"I'll show you a wrist," repeated Mr. Jaggers, with an immovabledetermination to show it. "Molly, let them see your wrist."
"Master," she again murmured. "Please!"
"Molly," said Mr. Jaggers, not looking at her, but obstinately looking at theopposite side of the room, "let them see both your wrists. Show them.Come!"
He took his hand from hers, and turned that wrist up on the table. She broughther other hand from behind her, and held the two out side by side. The lastwrist was much disfigured,—deeply scarred and scarred across and across. Whenshe held her hands out she took her eyes from Mr. Jaggers, and turned themwatchfully on every one of the rest of us in succession.
"There's power here," said Mr. Jaggers, coolly tracing out the sinews with hisforefinger. "Very few men have the power of wrist that this woman has. It'sremarkable what mere force of grip there is in these hands. I have had occasionto notice many hands; but I never saw stronger in that respect, man's orwoman's, than these."
While he said these words in a leisurely, critical style, she continued to lookat every one of us in regular succession as we sat. The moment he ceased, shelooked at him again. "That'll do, Molly," said Mr. Jaggers, giving her a slightnod; "you have been admired, and can go." She withdrew her hands and went outof the room, and Mr. Jaggers, putting the decanters on from his dumb-waiter,filled his glass and passed round the wine.
"At half-past nine, gentlemen," said he, "we must break up. Pray make the bestuse of your time. I am glad to see you all. Mr. Drummle, I drink to you."
If his object in singling out Drummle were to bring him out still more, itperfectly succeeded. In a sulky triumph, Drummle showed his morose depreciationof the rest of us, in a more and more offensive degree, until he becamedownright intolerable. Through all his stages, Mr. Jaggers followed him withthe same strange interest. He actually seemed to serve as a zest to Mr.Jaggers's wine.
In our boyish want of discretion I dare say we took too much to drink, and Iknow we talked too much. We became particularly hot upon some boorish sneer ofDrummle's, to the effect that we were too free with our money. It led to myremarking, with more zeal than discretion, that it came with a bad grace fromhim, to whom Startop had lent money in my presence but a week or so before.
"Well," retorted Drummle; "he'll be paid."
"I don't mean to imply that he won't," said I, "but it might make you hold yourtongue about us and our money, I should think."
"You should think!" retorted Drummle. "Oh Lord!"
"I dare say," I went on, meaning to be very severe, "that you wouldn't lendmoney to any of us if we wanted it."
"You are right," said Drummle. "I wouldn't lend one of you a sixpence. Iwouldn't lend anybody a sixpence."
"Rather mean to borrow under those circumstances, I should say."
"You should say," repeated Drummle. "Oh Lord!"
This was so very aggravating—the more especially as I found myself making noway against his surly obtuseness—that I said, disregarding Herbert's efforts tocheck me,—
"Come, Mr. Drummle, since we are on the subject, I'll tell you what passedbetween Herbert here and me, when you borrowed that money."
"I don't want to know what passed between Herbert there and you,"growled Drummle. And I think he added in a lower growl, that we might both goto the devil and shake ourselves.
"I'll tell you, however," said I, "whether you want to know or not. We saidthat as you put it in your pocket very glad to get it, you seemed to beimmensely amused at his being so weak as to lend it."
Drummle laughed outright, and sat laughing in our faces, with his hands in hispockets and his round shoulders raised; plainly signifying that it was quitetrue, and that he despised us as asses all.
Hereupon Startop took him in hand, though with a much better grace than I hadshown, and exhorted him to be a little more agreeable. Startop, being a lively,bright young fellow, and Drummle being the exact opposite, the latter wasalways disposed to resent him as a direct personal affront. He now retorted ina coarse, lumpish way, and Startop tried to turn the discussion aside with somesmall pleasantry that made us all laugh. Resenting this little success morethan anything, Drummle, without any threat or warning, pulled his hands out ofhis pockets, dropped his round shoulders, swore, took up a large glass, andwould have flung it at his adversary's head, but for our entertainer'sdexterously seizing it at the instant when it was raised for that purpose.
"Gentlemen," said Mr. Jaggers, deliberately putting down the glass, and haulingout his gold repeater by its massive chain, "I am exceedingly sorry to announcethat it's half past nine."
On this hint we all rose to depart. Before we got to the street door, Startopwas cheerily calling Drummle "old boy," as if nothing had happened. But the oldboy was so far from responding, that he would not even walk to Hammersmith onthe same side of the way; so Herbert and I, who remained in town, saw themgoing down the street on opposite sides; Startop leading, and Drummle laggingbehind in the shadow of the houses, much as he was wont to follow in his boat.
As the door was not yet shut, I thought I would leave Herbert there for amoment, and run upstairs again to say a word to my guardian. I found him in hisdressing-room surrounded by his stock of boots, already hard at it, washing hishands of us.
I told him I had come up again to say how sorry I was that anythingdisagreeable should have occurred, and that I hoped he would not blame me much.
"Pooh!" said he, sluicing his face, and speaking through the water-drops; "it'snothing, Pip. I like that Spider though."
He had turned towards me now, and was shaking his head, and blowing, andtowelling himself.
"I am glad you like him, sir," said I—"but I don't."
"No, no," my guardian assented; "don't have too much to do with him. Keep asclear of him as you can. But I like the fellow, Pip; he is one of the truesort. Why, if I was a fortune-teller—"
Looking out of the towel, he caught my eye.
"But I am not a fortune-teller," he said, letting his head drop into a festoonof towel, and towelling away at his two ears. "You know what I am, don't you?Good night, Pip."
"Good night, sir."
In about a month after that, the Spider's time with Mr. Pocket was up for good,and, to the great relief of all the house but Mrs. Pocket, he went home to thefamily hole.
