
Chapter XXVII.
"MY DEAR MR PIP:—
"I write this by request of Mr. Gargery, for to let you know that he is goingto London in company with Mr. Wopsle and would be glad if agreeable to beallowed to see you. He would call at Barnard's Hotel Tuesday morning at nineo'clock, when if not agreeable please leave word. Your poor sister is much thesame as when you left. We talk of you in the kitchen every night, and wonderwhat you are saying and doing. If now considered in the light of a liberty,excuse it for the love of poor old days. No more, dear Mr. Pip, from
"Your ever obliged, and affectionate servant,        "BIDDY."
"P.S. He wishes me most particular to write what larks. He says you willunderstand. I hope and do not doubt it will be agreeable to see him, eventhough a gentleman, for you had ever a good heart, and he is a worthy, worthyman. I have read him all, excepting only the last little sentence, and hewishes me most particular to write again what larks."
I received this letter by the post on Monday morning, and therefore itsappointment was for next day. Let me confess exactly with what feelings Ilooked forward to Joe's coming.
Not with pleasure, though I was bound to him by so many ties; no; withconsiderable disturbance, some mortification, and a keen sense of incongruity.If I could have kept him away by paying money, I certainly would have paidmoney. My greatest reassurance was that he was coming to Barnard's Inn, not toHammersmith, and consequently would not fall in Bentley Drummle's way. I hadlittle objection to his being seen by Herbert or his father, for both of whom Ihad a respect; but I had the sharpest sensitiveness as to his being seen byDrummle, whom I held in contempt. So, throughout life, our worst weaknesses andmeannesses are usually committed for the sake of the people whom we mostdespise.
I had begun to be always decorating the chambers in some quite unnecessary andinappropriate way or other, and very expensive those wrestles with Barnardproved to be. By this time, the rooms were vastly different from what I hadfound them, and I enjoyed the honour of occupying a few prominent pages in thebooks of a neighbouring upholsterer. I had got on so fast of late, that I hadeven started a boy in boots,—top boots,—in bondage and slavery to whom I mighthave been said to pass my days. For, after I had made the monster (out of therefuse of my washerwoman's family), and had clothed him with a blue coat,canary waistcoat, white cravat, creamy breeches, and the boots alreadymentioned, I had to find him a little to do and a great deal to eat; and withboth of those horrible requirements he haunted my existence.
This avenging phantom was ordered to be on duty at eight on Tuesday morning inthe hall, (it was two feet square, as charged for floorcloth,) and Herbertsuggested certain things for breakfast that he thought Joe would like. While Ifelt sincerely obliged to him for being so interested and considerate, I had anodd half-provoked sense of suspicion upon me, that if Joe had been coming tosee him, he wouldn't have been quite so brisk about it.
However, I came into town on the Monday night to be ready for Joe, and I got upearly in the morning, and caused the sitting-room and breakfast-table to assumetheir most splendid appearance. Unfortunately the morning was drizzly, and anangel could not have concealed the fact that Barnard was shedding sooty tearsoutside the window, like some weak giant of a Sweep.
As the time approached I should have liked to run away, but the Avengerpursuant to orders was in the hall, and presently I heard Joe on the staircase.I knew it was Joe, by his clumsy manner of coming upstairs,—his state bootsbeing always too big for him,—and by the time it took him to read the names onthe other floors in the course of his ascent. When at last he stopped outsideour door, I could hear his finger tracing over the painted letters of my name,and I afterwards distinctly heard him breathing in at the keyhole. Finally hegave a faint single rap, and Pepper—such was the compromising name of theavenging boy—announced "Mr. Gargery!" I thought he never would have done wipinghis feet, and that I must have gone out to lift him off the mat, but at last hecame in.
"Joe, how are you, Joe?"
"Pip, how AIR you, Pip?"
With his good honest face all glowing and shining, and his hat put down on thefloor between us, he caught both my hands and worked them straight up and down,as if I had been the last-patented Pump.
"I am glad to see you, Joe. Give me your hat."
But Joe, taking it up carefully with both hands, like a bird's-nest with eggsin it, wouldn't hear of parting with that piece of property, and persisted instanding talking over it in a most uncomfortable way.
"Which you have that growed," said Joe, "and that swelled, and thatgentle-folked;" Joe considered a little before he discovered this word; "as tobe sure you are a honour to your king and country."
"And you, Joe, look wonderfully well."
"Thank God," said Joe, "I'm ekerval to most. And your sister, she's no worsethan she were. And Biddy, she's ever right and ready. And all friends is nobackerder, if not no forarder. 'Ceptin Wopsle; he's had a drop."
All this time (still with both hands taking great care of the bird's-nest), Joewas rolling his eyes round and round the room, and round and round the floweredpattern of my dressing-gown.
"Had a drop, Joe?"
"Why yes," said Joe, lowering his voice, "he's left the Church and went intothe playacting. Which the playacting have likeways brought him to London alongwith me. And his wish were," said Joe, getting the bird's-nest under his leftarm for the moment, and groping in it for an egg with his right; "if nooffence, as I would 'and you that."
I took what Joe gave me, and found it to be the crumpled play-bill of a smallmetropolitan theatre, announcing the first appearance, in that very week, of"the celebrated Provincial Amateur of Roscian renown, whose unique performancein the highest tragic walk of our National Bard has lately occasioned so greata sensation in local dramatic circles."
"Were you at his performance, Joe?" I inquired.
"I were," said Joe, with emphasis and solemnity.
"Was there a great sensation?"
"Why," said Joe, "yes, there certainly were a peck of orange-peel. Particklerwhen he see the ghost. Though I put it to yourself, sir, whether it werecalc'lated to keep a man up to his work with a good hart, to be continiwallycutting in betwixt him and the Ghost with "Amen!" A man may have had amisfortun' and been in the Church," said Joe, lowering his voice to anargumentative and feeling tone, "but that is no reason why you should put himout at such a time. Which I meantersay, if the ghost of a man's own fathercannot be allowed to claim his attention, what can, Sir? Still more, when hismourning 'at is unfortunately made so small as that the weight of the blackfeathers brings it off, try to keep it on how you may."
A ghost-seeing effect in Joe's own countenance informed me that Herbert hadentered the room. So, I presented Joe to Herbert, who held out his hand; butJoe backed from it, and held on by the bird's-nest.
"Your servant, Sir," said Joe, "which I hope as you and Pip"—here his eye fellon the Avenger, who was putting some toast on table, and so plainly denoted anintention to make that young gentleman one of the family, that I frowned itdown and confused him more—"I meantersay, you two gentlemen,—which I hope asyou get your elths in this close spot? For the present may be a werry good inn,according to London opinions," said Joe, confidentially, "and I believe itscharacter do stand it; but I wouldn't keep a pig in it myself,—not in the casethat I wished him to fatten wholesome and to eat with a meller flavour on him."
Having borne this flattering testimony to the merits of our dwelling-place, andhaving incidentally shown this tendency to call me "sir," Joe, being invited tosit down to table, looked all round the room for a suitable spot on which todeposit his hat,—as if it were only on some very few rare substances in naturethat it could find a resting place,—and ultimately stood it on an extremecorner of the chimney-piece, from which it ever afterwards fell off atintervals.
"Do you take tea, or coffee, Mr. Gargery?" asked Herbert, who always presidedof a morning.
"Thankee, Sir," said Joe, stiff from head to foot, "I'll take whichever is mostagreeable to yourself."
"What do you say to coffee?"
"Thankee, Sir," returned Joe, evidently dispirited by the proposal, "since youare so kind as make chice of coffee, I will not run contrairy to yourown opinions. But don't you never find it a little 'eating?"
"Say tea then," said Herbert, pouring it out.
Here Joe's hat tumbled off the mantel-piece, and he started out of his chairand picked it up, and fitted it to the same exact spot. As if it were anabsolute point of good breeding that it should tumble off again soon.
"When did you come to town, Mr. Gargery?"
"Were it yesterday afternoon?" said Joe, after coughing behind his hand, as ifhe had had time to catch the whooping-cough since he came. "No it were not. Yesit were. Yes. It were yesterday afternoon" (with an appearance of mingledwisdom, relief, and strict impartiality).
"Have you seen anything of London yet?"
"Why, yes, Sir," said Joe, "me and Wopsle went off straight to look at theBlacking Ware'us. But we didn't find that it come up to its likeness in the redbills at the shop doors; which I meantersay," added Joe, in an explanatorymanner, "as it is there drawd too architectooralooral."
I really believe Joe would have prolonged this word (mightily expressive to mymind of some architecture that I know) into a perfect Chorus, but for hisattention being providentially attracted by his hat, which was toppling.Indeed, it demanded from him a constant attention, and a quickness of eye andhand, very like that exacted by wicket-keeping. He made extraordinary play withit, and showed the greatest skill; now, rushing at it and catching it neatly asit dropped; now, merely stopping it midway, beating it up, and humouring it invarious parts of the room and against a good deal of the pattern of the paperon the wall, before he felt it safe to close with it; finally splashing it intothe slop-basin, where I took the liberty of laying hands upon it.




As to his shirt-collar, and his coat-collar, they were perplexing to reflectupon,—insoluble mysteries both. Why should a man scrape himself to that extent,before he could consider himself full dressed? Why should he suppose itnecessary to be purified by suffering for his holiday clothes? Then he fellinto such unaccountable fits of meditation, with his fork midway between hisplate and his mouth; had his eyes attracted in such strange directions; wasafflicted with such remarkable coughs; sat so far from the table, and droppedso much more than he ate, and pretended that he hadn't dropped it; that I washeartily glad when Herbert left us for the City.
I had neither the good sense nor the good feeling to know that this was all myfault, and that if I had been easier with Joe, Joe would have been easier withme. I felt impatient of him and out of temper with him; in which condition heheaped coals of fire on my head.
"Us two being now alone, sir,"—began Joe.
"Joe," I interrupted, pettishly, "how can you call me, sir?"
Joe looked at me for a single instant with something faintly like reproach.Utterly preposterous as his cravat was, and as his collars were, I wasconscious of a sort of dignity in the look.
"Us two being now alone," resumed Joe, "and me having the intentions andabilities to stay not many minutes more, I will now conclude—leastways begin—tomention what have led to my having had the present honour. For was it not,"said Joe, with his old air of lucid exposition, "that my only wish were to beuseful to you, I should not have had the honour of breaking wittles in thecompany and abode of gentlemen."
I was so unwilling to see the look again, that I made no remonstrance againstthis tone.
"Well, sir," pursued Joe, "this is how it were. I were at the Bargemen t'othernight, Pip;"—whenever he subsided into affection, he called me Pip, andwhenever he relapsed into politeness he called me sir; "when there come up inhis shay-cart, Pumblechook. Which that same identical," said Joe, going down anew track, "do comb my 'air the wrong way sometimes, awful, by giving out upand down town as it were him which ever had your infant companionation and werelooked upon as a playfellow by yourself."
"Nonsense. It was you, Joe."
"Which I fully believed it were, Pip," said Joe, slightly tossing his head,"though it signify little now, sir. Well, Pip; this same identical, which hismanners is given to blusterous, come to me at the Bargemen (wot a pipe and apint of beer do give refreshment to the workingman, sir, and do not overstimilate), and his word were, ‘Joseph, Miss Havisham she wish to speak toyou.'"
"Miss Havisham, Joe?"
"‘She wish,' were Pumblechook's word, ‘to speak to you.'" Joe sat and rolledhis eyes at the ceiling.
"Yes, Joe? Go on, please."
"Next day, sir," said Joe, looking at me as if I were a long way off, "havingcleaned myself, I go and I see Miss A."
"Miss A., Joe? Miss Havisham?"
"Which I say, sir," replied Joe, with an air of legal formality, as if he weremaking his will, "Miss A., or otherways Havisham. Her expression air then asfollering: ‘Mr. Gargery. You air in correspondence with Mr. Pip?' Having had aletter from you, I were able to say ‘I am.' (When I married your sister, sir, Isaid ‘I will;' and when I answered your friend, Pip, I said ‘I am.') ‘Would youtell him, then,' said she, ‘that which Estella has come home and would be gladto see him.'"
I felt my face fire up as I looked at Joe. I hope one remote cause of itsfiring may have been my consciousness that if I had known his errand, I shouldhave given him more encouragement.
"Biddy," pursued Joe, "when I got home and asked her fur to write the messageto you, a little hung back. Biddy says, ‘I know he will be very glad to have itby word of mouth, it is holiday time, you want to see him, go!' I have nowconcluded, sir," said Joe, rising from his chair, "and, Pip, I wish you everwell and ever prospering to a greater and a greater height."
"But you are not going now, Joe?"
"Yes I am," said Joe.
"But you are coming back to dinner, Joe?"
"No I am not," said Joe.
Our eyes met, and all the "Sir" melted out of that manly heart as he gave mehis hand.
"Pip, dear old chap, life is made of ever so many partings welded together, asI may say, and one man's a blacksmith, and one's a whitesmith, and one's agoldsmith, and one's a coppersmith. Diwisions among such must come, and must bemet as they come. If there's been any fault at all to-day, it's mine. You andme is not two figures to be together in London; nor yet anywheres else but whatis private, and beknown, and understood among friends. It ain't that I amproud, but that I want to be right, as you shall never see me no more in theseclothes. I'm wrong in these clothes. I'm wrong out of the forge, the kitchen,or off th' meshes. You won't find half so much fault in me if you think of mein my forge dress, with my hammer in my hand, or even my pipe. You won't findhalf so much fault in me if, supposing as you should ever wish to see me, youcome and put your head in at the forge window and see Joe the blacksmith,there, at the old anvil, in the old burnt apron, sticking to the old work. I'mawful dull, but I hope I've beat out something nigh the rights of this at last.And so GOD bless you, dear old Pip, old chap, GODbless you!"
I had not been mistaken in my fancy that there was a simple dignity in him. Thefashion of his dress could no more come in its way when he spoke these wordsthan it could come in its way in Heaven. He touched me gently on the forehead,and went out. As soon as I could recover myself sufficiently, I hurried outafter him and looked for him in the neighbouring streets; but he was gone.
