
Chapter XXVIII.
It wasclear that I must repair to our town next day, and in the first flow of myrepentance, it was equally clear that I must stay at Joe's. But, when I hadsecured my box-place by to-morrow's coach, and had been down to Mr. Pocket'sand back, I was not by any means convinced on the last point, and began toinvent reasons and make excuses for putting up at the Blue Boar. I should be aninconvenience at Joe's; I was not expected, and my bed would not be ready; Ishould be too far from Miss Havisham's, and she was exacting and mightn't likeit. All other swindlers upon earth are nothing to the self-swindlers, and withsuch pretences did I cheat myself. Surely a curious thing. That I shouldinnocently take a bad half-crown of somebody else's manufacture is reasonableenough; but that I should knowingly reckon the spurious coin of my own make asgood money! An obliging stranger, under pretence of compactly folding up mybank-notes for security's sake, abstracts the notes and gives me nutshells; butwhat is his sleight of hand to mine, when I fold up my own nutshells and passthem on myself as notes!
Having settled that I must go to the Blue Boar, my mind was much disturbed byindecision whether or not to take the Avenger. It was tempting to think of thatexpensive Mercenary publicly airing his boots in the archway of the Blue Boar'sposting-yard; it was almost solemn to imagine him casually produced in thetailor's shop, and confounding the disrespectful senses of Trabb's boy. On theother hand, Trabb's boy might worm himself into his intimacy and tell himthings; or, reckless and desperate wretch as I knew he could be, might hoot himin the High Street. My patroness, too, might hear of him, and not approve. Onthe whole, I resolved to leave the Avenger behind.
It was the afternoon coach by which I had taken my place, and, as winter hadnow come round, I should not arrive at my destination until two or three hoursafter dark. Our time of starting from the Cross Keys was two o'clock. I arrivedon the ground with a quarter of an hour to spare, attended by the Avenger,—if Imay connect that expression with one who never attended on me if he couldpossibly help it.
At that time it was customary to carry Convicts down to the dock-yards bystage-coach. As I had often heard of them in the capacity of outsidepassengers, and had more than once seen them on the high road dangling theirironed legs over the coach roof, I had no cause to be surprised when Herbert,meeting me in the yard, came up and told me there were two convicts going downwith me. But I had a reason that was an old reason now for constitutionallyfaltering whenever I heard the word "convict."
"You don't mind them, Handel?" said Herbert.
"O no!"
"I thought you seemed as if you didn't like them?"
"I can't pretend that I do like them, and I suppose you don't particularly. ButI don't mind them."
"See! There they are," said Herbert, "coming out of the Tap. What a degradedand vile sight it is!"
They had been treating their guard, I suppose, for they had a gaoler with them,and all three came out wiping their mouths on their hands. The two convictswere handcuffed together, and had irons on their legs,—irons of a pattern thatI knew well. They wore the dress that I likewise knew well. Their keeper had abrace of pistols, and carried a thick-knobbed bludgeon under his arm; but hewas on terms of good understanding with them, and stood with them beside him,looking on at the putting-to of the horses, rather with an air as if theconvicts were an interesting Exhibition not formally open at the moment, and hethe Curator. One was a taller and stouter man than the other, and appeared as amatter of course, according to the mysterious ways of the world, both convictand free, to have had allotted to him the smaller suit of clothes. His arms andlegs were like great pincushions of those shapes, and his attire disguised himabsurdly; but I knew his half-closed eye at one glance. There stood the manwhom I had seen on the settle at the Three Jolly Bargemen on a Saturday night,and who had brought me down with his invisible gun!
It was easy to make sure that as yet he knew me no more than if he had neverseen me in his life. He looked across at me, and his eye appraised mywatch-chain, and then he incidentally spat and said something to the otherconvict, and they laughed and slued themselves round with a clink of theircoupling manacle, and looked at something else. The great numbers on theirbacks, as if they were street doors; their coarse mangy ungainly outer surface,as if they were lower animals; their ironed legs, apologetically garlanded withpocket-handkerchiefs; and the way in which all present looked at them and keptfrom them; made them (as Herbert had said) a most disagreeable and degradedspectacle.
But this was not the worst of it. It came out that the whole of the back of thecoach had been taken by a family removing from London, and that there were noplaces for the two prisoners but on the seat in front behind the coachman.Hereupon, a choleric gentleman, who had taken the fourth place on that seat,flew into a most violent passion, and said that it was a breach of contract tomix him up with such villainous company, and that it was poisonous, andpernicious, and infamous, and shameful, and I don't know what else. At thistime the coach was ready and the coachman impatient, and we were all preparingto get up, and the prisoners had come over with their keeper,—bringing withthem that curious flavour of bread-poultice, baize, rope-yarn, and hearthstone,which attends the convict presence.
"Don't take it so much amiss, sir," pleaded the keeper to the angry passenger;"I'll sit next you myself. I'll put 'em on the outside of the row. They won'tinterfere with you, sir. You needn't know they're there."
"And don't blame me," growled the convict I had recognised. "Idon't want to go. I am quite ready to stay behind. As fur as I amconcerned any one's welcome to my place."
"Or mine," said the other, gruffly. "I wouldn't have incommoded none ofyou, if I'd had my way." Then they both laughed, and began crackingnuts, and spitting the shells about.—As I really think I should have liked todo myself, if I had been in their place and so despised.
At length, it was voted that there was no help for the angry gentleman, andthat he must either go in his chance company or remain behind. So he got intohis place, still making complaints, and the keeper got into the place next him,and the convicts hauled themselves up as well as they could, and the convict Ihad recognised sat behind me with his breath on the hair of my head.
"Good-bye, Handel!" Herbert called out as we started. I thought what a blessedfortune it was, that he had found another name for me than Pip.
It is impossible to express with what acuteness I felt the convict's breathing,not only on the back of my head, but all along my spine. The sensation was likebeing touched in the marrow with some pungent and searching acid, it set myvery teeth on edge. He seemed to have more breathing business to do thananother man, and to make more noise in doing it; and I was conscious of growinghigh-shouldered on one side, in my shrinking endeavours to fend him off.
The weather was miserably raw, and the two cursed the cold. It made us alllethargic before we had gone far, and when we had left the Half-way Housebehind, we habitually dozed and shivered and were silent. I dozed off, myself,in considering the question whether I ought to restore a couple of poundssterling to this creature before losing sight of him, and how it could best bedone. In the act of dipping forward as if I were going to bathe among thehorses, I woke in a fright and took the question up again.
But I must have lost it longer than I had thought, since, although I couldrecognise nothing in the darkness and the fitful lights and shadows of ourlamps, I traced marsh country in the cold damp wind that blew at us. Coweringforward for warmth and to make me a screen against the wind, the convicts werecloser to me than before. The very first words I heard them interchange as Ibecame conscious, were the words of my own thought, "Two One Pound notes."
"How did he get 'em?" said the convict I had never seen.
"How should I know?" returned the other. "He had 'em stowed away somehows. Givhim by friends, I expect."
"I wish," said the other, with a bitter curse upon the cold, "that I had 'emhere."
"Two one pound notes, or friends?"
"Two one pound notes. I'd sell all the friends I ever had for one, and think ita blessed good bargain. Well? So he says—?"
"So he says," resumed the convict I had recognised,—"it was all said and donein half a minute, behind a pile of timber in the Dock-yard,—‘You're a-going tobe discharged?' Yes, I was. Would I find out that boy that had fed him and kephis secret, and give him them two one pound notes? Yes, I would. And I did."
"More fool you," growled the other. "I'd have spent 'em on a Man, in wittlesand drink. He must have been a green one. Mean to say he knowed nothing ofyou?"
"Not a ha'porth. Different gangs and different ships. He was tried again forprison breaking, and got made a Lifer."
"And was that—Honour!—the only time you worked out, in this part of thecountry?"
"The only time."
"What might have been your opinion of the place?"
"A most beastly place. Mudbank, mist, swamp, and work; work, swamp, mist, andmudbank."
They both execrated the place in very strong language, and gradually growledthemselves out, and had nothing left to say.
After overhearing this dialogue, I should assuredly have got down and been leftin the solitude and darkness of the highway, but for feeling certain that theman had no suspicion of my identity. Indeed, I was not only so changed in thecourse of nature, but so differently dressed and so differently circumstanced,that it was not at all likely he could have known me without accidental help.Still, the coincidence of our being together on the coach, was sufficientlystrange to fill me with a dread that some other coincidence might at any momentconnect me, in his hearing, with my name. For this reason, I resolved to alightas soon as we touched the town, and put myself out of his hearing. This deviceI executed successfully. My little portmanteau was in the boot under my feet; Ihad but to turn a hinge to get it out; I threw it down before me, got downafter it, and was left at the first lamp on the first stones of the townpavement. As to the convicts, they went their way with the coach, and I knew atwhat point they would be spirited off to the river. In my fancy, I saw the boatwith its convict crew waiting for them at the slime-washed stairs,—again heardthe gruff "Give way, you!" like and order to dogs,—again saw the wicked Noah'sArk lying out on the black water.
I could not have said what I was afraid of, for my fear was altogetherundefined and vague, but there was great fear upon me. As I walked on to thehotel, I felt that a dread, much exceeding the mere apprehension of a painfulor disagreeable recognition, made me tremble. I am confident that it took nodistinctness of shape, and that it was the revival for a few minutes of theterror of childhood.
The coffee-room at the Blue Boar was empty, and I had not only ordered mydinner there, but had sat down to it, before the waiter knew me. As soon as hehad apologised for the remissness of his memory, he asked me if he should sendBoots for Mr. Pumblechook?
"No," said I, "certainly not."
The waiter (it was he who had brought up the Great Remonstrance from theCommercials, on the day when I was bound) appeared surprised, and took theearliest opportunity of putting a dirty old copy of a local newspaper sodirectly in my way, that I took it up and read this paragraph:—
Our readers will learn, not altogether without interest, in reference to therecent romantic rise in fortune of a young artificer in iron of thisneighbourhood (what a theme, by the way, for the magic pen of our as yet notuniversally acknowledged townsman TOOBY, the poet of ourcolumns!) that the youth's earliest patron, companion, and friend, was a highlyrespected individual not entirely unconnected with the corn and seed trade, andwhose eminently convenient and commodious business premises are situate withina hundred miles of the High Street. It is not wholly irrespective of ourpersonal feelings that we record HIM as the Mentor of our youngTelemachus, for it is good to know that our town produced the founder of thelatter's fortunes. Does the thought-contracted brow of the local Sage or thelustrous eye of local Beauty inquire whose fortunes? We believe that QuintinMatsys was the BLACKSMITH of Antwerp. VERB.SAP.
I entertain a conviction, based upon large experience, that if in the days ofmy prosperity I had gone to the North Pole, I should have met somebody there,wandering Esquimaux or civilized man, who would have told me that Pumblechookwas my earliest patron and the founder of my fortunes.
