
Chapter XXIX.
Betimes in the morning I was up and out. It was too early yet togo to Miss Havisham's, so I loitered into the country on Miss Havisham's sideof town,—which was not Joe's side; I could go there to-morrow,—thinking aboutmy patroness, and painting brilliant pictures of her plans for me.
She had adopted Estella, she had as good as adopted me, and it could not failto be her intention to bring us together. She reserved it for me to restore thedesolate house, admit the sunshine into the dark rooms, set the clocks a-goingand the cold hearths a-blazing, tear down the cobwebs, destroy the vermin,—inshort, do all the shining deeds of the young Knight of romance, and marry thePrincess. I had stopped to look at the house as I passed; and its seared redbrick walls, blocked windows, and strong green ivy clasping even the stacks ofchimneys with its twigs and tendons, as if with sinewy old arms, had made up arich attractive mystery, of which I was the hero. Estella was the inspirationof it, and the heart of it, of course. But, though she had taken such strongpossession of me, though my fancy and my hope were so set upon her, though herinfluence on my boyish life and character had been all-powerful, I did not,even that romantic morning, invest her with any attributes save those shepossessed. I mention this in this place, of a fixed purpose, because it is theclue by which I am to be followed into my poor labyrinth. According to myexperience, the conventional notion of a lover cannot be always true. Theunqualified truth is, that when I loved Estella with the love of a man, I lovedher simply because I found her irresistible. Once for all; I knew to my sorrow,often and often, if not always, that I loved her against reason, againstpromise, against peace, against hope, against happiness, against alldiscouragement that could be. Once for all; I loved her none the less because Iknew it, and it had no more influence in restraining me than if I had devoutlybelieved her to be human perfection.
I so shaped out my walk as to arrive at the gate at my old time. When I hadrung at the bell with an unsteady hand, I turned my back upon the gate, while Itried to get my breath and keep the beating of my heart moderately quiet. Iheard the side-door open, and steps come across the courtyard; but I pretendednot to hear, even when the gate swung on its rusty hinges.
Being at last touched on the shoulder, I started and turned. I started muchmore naturally then, to find myself confronted by a man in a sober grey dress.The last man I should have expected to see in that place of porter at MissHavisham's door.
"Orlick!"
"Ah, young master, there's more changes than yours. But come in, come in. It'sopposed to my orders to hold the gate open."
I entered and he swung it, and locked it, and took the key out. "Yes!" said he,facing round, after doggedly preceding me a few steps towards the house. "HereI am!"
"How did you come here?"
"I come here," he retorted, "on my legs. I had my box brought alongside me in abarrow."
"Are you here for good?"
"I ain't here for harm, young master, I suppose?"
I was not so sure of that. I had leisure to entertain the retort in my mind,while he slowly lifted his heavy glance from the pavement, up my legs and arms,to my face.
"Then you have left the forge?" I said.
"Do this look like a forge?" replied Orlick, sending his glance all round himwith an air of injury. "Now, do it look like it?"
I asked him how long he had left Gargery's forge?
"One day is so like another here," he replied, "that I don't know withoutcasting it up. However, I come here some time since you left."
"I could have told you that, Orlick."
"Ah!" said he, dryly. "But then you've got to be a scholar."
By this time we had come to the house, where I found his room to be one justwithin the side-door, with a little window in it looking on the courtyard. Inits small proportions, it was not unlike the kind of place usually assigned toa gate-porter in Paris. Certain keys were hanging on the wall, to which he nowadded the gate key; and his patchwork-covered bed was in a little innerdivision or recess. The whole had a slovenly, confined, and sleepy look, like acage for a human dormouse; while he, looming dark and heavy in the shadow of acorner by the window, looked like the human dormouse for whom it was fittedup,—as indeed he was.
"I never saw this room before," I remarked; "but there used to be no Porterhere."
"No," said he; "not till it got about that there was no protection on thepremises, and it come to be considered dangerous, with convicts and Tag and Ragand Bobtail going up and down. And then I was recommended to the place as a manwho could give another man as good as he brought, and I took it. It's easierthan bellowsing and hammering.—That's loaded, that is."
My eye had been caught by a gun with a brass-bound stock over thechimney-piece, and his eye had followed mine.
"Well," said I, not desirous of more conversation, "shall I go up to MissHavisham?"
"Burn me, if I know!" he retorted, first stretching himself and then shakinghimself; "my orders ends here, young master. I give this here bell a rap withthis here hammer, and you go on along the passage till you meet somebody."
"I am expected, I believe?"
"Burn me twice over, if I can say!" said he.
Upon that, I turned down the long passage which I had first trodden in my thickboots, and he made his bell sound. At the end of the passage, while the bellwas still reverberating, I found Sarah Pocket, who appeared to have now becomeconstitutionally green and yellow by reason of me.
"Oh!" said she. "You, is it, Mr. Pip?"
"It is, Miss Pocket. I am glad to tell you that Mr. Pocket and family are allwell."
"Are they any wiser?" said Sarah, with a dismal shake of the head; "they hadbetter be wiser, than well. Ah, Matthew, Matthew! You know your way, sir?"
Tolerably, for I had gone up the staircase in the dark, many a time. I ascendedit now, in lighter boots than of yore, and tapped in my old way at the door ofMiss Havisham's room. "Pip's rap," I heard her say, immediately; "come in,Pip."
She was in her chair near the old table, in the old dress, with her two handscrossed on her stick, her chin resting on them, and her eyes on the fire.Sitting near her, with the white shoe, that had never been worn, in her hand,and her head bent as she looked at it, was an elegant lady whom I had neverseen.
"Come in, Pip," Miss Havisham continued to mutter, without looking round or up;"come in, Pip, how do you do, Pip? so you kiss my hand as if I were a queen,eh?—Well?"
She looked up at me suddenly, only moving her eyes, and repeated in a grimlyplayful manner,—
"Well?"
"I heard, Miss Havisham," said I, rather at a loss, "that you were so kind asto wish me to come and see you, and I came directly."
"Well?"
The lady whom I had never seen before, lifted up her eyes and looked archly atme, and then I saw that the eyes were Estella's eyes. But she was so muchchanged, was so much more beautiful, so much more womanly, in all thingswinning admiration, had made such wonderful advance, that I seemed to have madenone. I fancied, as I looked at her, that I slipped hopelessly back into thecoarse and common boy again. O the sense of distance and disparity that cameupon me, and the inaccessibility that came about her!
She gave me her hand. I stammered something about the pleasure I felt in seeingher again, and about my having looked forward to it, for a long, long time.
"Do you find her much changed, Pip?" asked Miss Havisham, with her greedy look,and striking her stick upon a chair that stood between them, as a sign to me tosit down there.
"When I came in, Miss Havisham, I thought there was nothing of Estella in theface or figure; but now it all settles down so curiously into the old—"
"What? You are not going to say into the old Estella?" Miss Havishaminterrupted. "She was proud and insulting, and you wanted to go away from her.Don't you remember?"
I said confusedly that that was long ago, and that I knew no better then, andthe like. Estella smiled with perfect composure, and said she had no doubt ofmy having been quite right, and of her having been very disagreeable.
"Is he changed?" Miss Havisham asked her.
"Very much," said Estella, looking at me.
"Less coarse and common?" said Miss Havisham, playing with Estella's hair.
Estella laughed, and looked at the shoe in her hand, and laughed again, andlooked at me, and put the shoe down. She treated me as a boy still, but shelured me on.
We sat in the dreamy room among the old strange influences which had so wroughtupon me, and I learnt that she had but just come home from France, and that shewas going to London. Proud and wilful as of old, she had brought thosequalities into such subjection to her beauty that it was impossible and out ofnature—or I thought so—to separate them from her beauty. Truly it wasimpossible to dissociate her presence from all those wretched hankerings aftermoney and gentility that had disturbed my boyhood,—from all those ill-regulatedaspirations that had first made me ashamed of home and Joe,—from all thosevisions that had raised her face in the glowing fire, struck it out of the ironon the anvil, extracted it from the darkness of night to look in at the woodenwindow of the forge, and flit away. In a word, it was impossible for me toseparate her, in the past or in the present, from the innermost life of mylife.
It was settled that I should stay there all the rest of the day, and return tothe hotel at night, and to London to-morrow. When we had conversed for a while,Miss Havisham sent us two out to walk in the neglected garden: on our coming inby and by, she said, I should wheel her about a little, as in times of yore.
So, Estella and I went out into the garden by the gate through which I hadstrayed to my encounter with the pale young gentleman, now Herbert; I,trembling in spirit and worshipping the very hem of her dress; she, quitecomposed and most decidedly not worshipping the hem of mine. As we drew near tothe place of encounter, she stopped and said,—
"I must have been a singular little creature to hide and see that fight thatday; but I did, and I enjoyed it very much."
"You rewarded me very much."
"Did I?" she replied, in an incidental and forgetful way. "I remember Ientertained a great objection to your adversary, because I took it ill that heshould be brought here to pester me with his company."
"He and I are great friends now."
"Are you? I think I recollect though, that you read with his father?"
"Yes."
I made the admission with reluctance, for it seemed to have a boyish look, andshe already treated me more than enough like a boy.
"Since your change of fortune and prospects, you have changed your companions,"said Estella.
"Naturally," said I.
"And necessarily," she added, in a haughty tone; "what was fit company for youonce, would be quite unfit company for you now."
In my conscience, I doubt very much whether I had any lingering intention leftof going to see Joe; but if I had, this observation put it to flight.
"You had no idea of your impending good fortune, in those times?" said Estella,with a slight wave of her hand, signifying in the fighting times.
"Not the least."
The air of completeness and superiority with which she walked at my side, andthe air of youthfulness and submission with which I walked at hers, made acontrast that I strongly felt. It would have rankled in me more than it did, ifI had not regarded myself as eliciting it by being so set apart for her andassigned to her.
The garden was too overgrown and rank for walking in with ease, and after wehad made the round of it twice or thrice, we came out again into the breweryyard. I showed her to a nicety where I had seen her walking on the casks, thatfirst old day, and she said, with a cold and careless look in that direction,"Did I?" I reminded her where she had come out of the house and given me mymeat and drink, and she said, "I don't remember." "Not remember that you mademe cry?" said I. "No," said she, and shook her head and looked about her. Iverily believe that her not remembering and not minding in the least, made mecry again, inwardly,—and that is the sharpest crying of all.
"You must know," said Estella, condescending to me as a brilliant and beautifulwoman might, "that I have no heart,—if that has anything to do with my memory."
I got through some jargon to the effect that I took the liberty of doubtingthat. That I knew better. That there could be no such beauty without it.
"Oh! I have a heart to be stabbed in or shot in, I have no doubt," saidEstella, "and of course if it ceased to beat I should cease to be. But you knowwhat I mean. I have no softness there, no—sympathy—sentiment—nonsense."
What was it that was borne in upon my mind when she stood still andlooked attentively at me? Anything that I had seen in Miss Havisham? No. Insome of her looks and gestures there was that tinge of resemblance to MissHavisham which may often be noticed to have been acquired by children, fromgrown person with whom they have been much associated and secluded, and which,when childhood is passed, will produce a remarkable occasional likeness ofexpression between faces that are otherwise quite different. And yet I couldnot trace this to Miss Havisham. I looked again, and though she was stilllooking at me, the suggestion was gone.
What was it?
"I am serious," said Estella, not so much with a frown (for her brow wassmooth) as with a darkening of her face; "if we are to be thrown much together,you had better believe it at once. No!" imperiously stopping me as I opened mylips. "I have not bestowed my tenderness anywhere. I have never had any suchthing."
In another moment we were in the brewery, so long disused, and she pointed tothe high gallery where I had seen her going out on that same first day, andtold me she remembered to have been up there, and to have seen me standingscared below. As my eyes followed her white hand, again the same dim suggestionthat I could not possibly grasp crossed me. My involuntary start occasioned herto lay her hand upon my arm. Instantly the ghost passed once more and was gone.
What was it?
"What is the matter?" asked Estella. "Are you scared again?"
"I should be, if I believed what you said just now," I replied, to turn it off.
"Then you don't? Very well. It is said, at any rate. Miss Havisham will soon beexpecting you at your old post, though I think that might be laid aside now,with other old belongings. Let us make one more round of the garden, and thengo in. Come! You shall not shed tears for my cruelty to-day; you shall be myPage, and give me your shoulder."
Her handsome dress had trailed upon the ground. She held it in one hand now,and with the other lightly touched my shoulder as we walked. We walked roundthe ruined garden twice or thrice more, and it was all in bloom for me. If thegreen and yellow growth of weed in the chinks of the old wall had been the mostprecious flowers that ever blew, it could not have been more cherished in myremembrance.
There was no discrepancy of years between us to remove her far from me; we wereof nearly the same age, though of course the age told for more in her case thanin mine; but the air of inaccessibility which her beauty and her manner gaveher, tormented me in the midst of my delight, and at the height of theassurance I felt that our patroness had chosen us for one another. Wretchedboy!
At last we went back into the house, and there I heard, with surprise, that myguardian had come down to see Miss Havisham on business, and would come back todinner. The old wintry branches of chandeliers in the room where the moulderingtable was spread had been lighted while we were out, and Miss Havisham was inher chair and waiting for me.
It was like pushing the chair itself back into the past, when we began the oldslow circuit round about the ashes of the bridal feast. But, in the funerealroom, with that figure of the grave fallen back in the chair fixing its eyesupon her, Estella looked more bright and beautiful than before, and I was understronger enchantment.
The time so melted away, that our early dinner-hour drew close at hand, andEstella left us to prepare herself. We had stopped near the centre of the longtable, and Miss Havisham, with one of her withered arms stretched out of thechair, rested that clenched hand upon the yellow cloth. As Estella looked backover her shoulder before going out at the door, Miss Havisham kissed that handto her, with a ravenous intensity that was of its kind quite dreadful.
Then, Estella being gone and we two left alone, she turned to me, and said in awhisper,—
"Is she beautiful, graceful, well-grown? Do you admire her?"
"Everybody must who sees her, Miss Havisham."
She drew an arm round my neck, and drew my head close down to hers as she satin the chair. "Love her, love her, love her! How does she use you?"
Before I could answer (if I could have answered so difficult a question at all)she repeated, "Love her, love her, love her! If she favours you, love her. Ifshe wounds you, love her. If she tears your heart to pieces,—and as it getsolder and stronger it will tear deeper,—love her, love her, love her!"
Never had I seen such passionate eagerness as was joined to her utterance ofthese words. I could feel the muscles of the thin arm round my neck swell withthe vehemence that possessed her.
"Hear me, Pip! I adopted her, to be loved. I bred her and educated her, to beloved. I developed her into what she is, that she might be loved. Love her!"
She said the word often enough, and there could be no doubt that she meant tosay it; but if the often repeated word had been hate instead oflove—despair—revenge—dire death—it could not have sounded from her lips morelike a curse.
"I'll tell you," said she, in the same hurried passionate whisper, "what reallove is. It is blind devotion, unquestioning self-humiliation, uttersubmission, trust and belief against yourself and against the whole world,giving up your whole heart and soul to the smiter—as I did!"
When she came to that, and to a wild cry that followed that, I caught her roundthe waist. For she rose up in the chair, in her shroud of a dress, and struckat the air as if she would as soon have struck herself against the wall andfallen dead.
All this passed in a few seconds. As I drew her down into her chair, I wasconscious of a scent that I knew, and turning, saw my guardian in the room.
He always carried (I have not yet mentioned it, I think) a pocket-handkerchiefof rich silk and of imposing proportions, which was of great value to him inhis profession. I have seen him so terrify a client or a witness byceremoniously unfolding this pocket-handkerchief as if he were immediatelygoing to blow his nose, and then pausing, as if he knew he should not have timeto do it before such client or witness committed himself, that theself-committal has followed directly, quite as a matter of course. When I sawhim in the room he had this expressive pocket-handkerchief in both hands, andwas looking at us. On meeting my eye, he said plainly, by a momentary andsilent pause in that attitude, "Indeed? Singular!" and then put thehandkerchief to its right use with wonderful effect.
Miss Havisham had seen him as soon as I, and was (like everybody else) afraidof him. She made a strong attempt to compose herself, and stammered that he wasas punctual as ever.
"As punctual as ever," he repeated, coming up to us. "(How do you do, Pip?Shall I give you a ride, Miss Havisham? Once round?) And so you are here, Pip?"
I told him when I had arrived, and how Miss Havisham had wished me to come andsee Estella. To which he replied, "Ah! Very fine young lady!" Then he pushedMiss Havisham in her chair before him, with one of his large hands, and put theother in his trousers-pocket as if the pocket were full of secrets.
"Well, Pip! How often have you seen Miss Estella before?" said he, when he cameto a stop.
"How often?"
"Ah! How many times? Ten thousand times?"
"Oh! Certainly not so many."
"Twice?"
"Jaggers," interposed Miss Havisham, much to my relief, "leave my Pip alone,and go with him to your dinner."
He complied, and we groped our way down the dark stairs together. While we werestill on our way to those detached apartments across the paved yard at theback, he asked me how often I had seen Miss Havisham eat and drink; offering mea breadth of choice, as usual, between a hundred times and once.
I considered, and said, "Never."
"And never will, Pip," he retorted, with a frowning smile. "She has neverallowed herself to be seen doing either, since she lived this present life ofhers. She wanders about in the night, and then lays hands on such food as shetakes."
"Pray, sir," said I, "may I ask you a question?"
"You may," said he, "and I may decline to answer it. Put your question."
"Estella's name. Is it Havisham or—?" I had nothing to add.
"Or what?" said he.
"Is it Havisham?"
"It is Havisham."
This brought us to the dinner-table, where she and Sarah Pocket awaited us. Mr.Jaggers presided, Estella sat opposite to him, I faced my green and yellowfriend. We dined very well, and were waited on by a maid-servant whom I hadnever seen in all my comings and goings, but who, for anything I know, had beenin that mysterious house the whole time. After dinner a bottle of choice oldport was placed before my guardian (he was evidently well acquainted with thevintage), and the two ladies left us.
Anything to equal the determined reticence of Mr. Jaggers under that roof Inever saw elsewhere, even in him. He kept his very looks to himself, andscarcely directed his eyes to Estella's face once during dinner. When she spoketo him, he listened, and in due course answered, but never looked at her, thatI could see. On the other hand, she often looked at him, with interest andcuriosity, if not distrust, but his face never showed the least consciousness.Throughout dinner he took a dry delight in making Sarah Pocket greener andyellower, by often referring in conversation with me to my expectations; buthere, again, he showed no consciousness, and even made it appear that heextorted—and even did extort, though I don't know how—those references out ofmy innocent self.
And when he and I were left alone together, he sat with an air upon him ofgeneral lying by in consequence of information he possessed, that really wastoo much for me. He cross-examined his very wine when he had nothing else inhand. He held it between himself and the candle, tasted the port, rolled it inhis mouth, swallowed it, looked at his glass again, smelt the port, tried it,drank it, filled again, and cross-examined the glass again, until I was asnervous as if I had known the wine to be telling him something to mydisadvantage. Three or four times I feebly thought I would start conversation;but whenever he saw me going to ask him anything, he looked at me with hisglass in his hand, and rolling his wine about in his mouth, as if requesting meto take notice that it was of no use, for he couldn't answer.
I think Miss Pocket was conscious that the sight of me involved her in thedanger of being goaded to madness, and perhaps tearing off her cap,—which was avery hideous one, in the nature of a muslin mop,—and strewing the ground withher hair,—which assuredly had never grown on her head. She did notappear when we afterwards went up to Miss Havisham's room, and we four playedat whist. In the interval, Miss Havisham, in a fantastic way, had put some ofthe most beautiful jewels from her dressing-table into Estella's hair, andabout her bosom and arms; and I saw even my guardian look at her from under histhick eyebrows, and raise them a little, when her loveliness was before him,with those rich flushes of glitter and colour in it.




Of the manner and extent to which he took our trumps into custody, and came outwith mean little cards at the ends of hands, before which the glory of ourKings and Queens was utterly abased, I say nothing; nor, of the feeling that Ihad, respecting his looking upon us personally in the light of three veryobvious and poor riddles that he had found out long ago. What I suffered from,was the incompatibility between his cold presence and my feelings towardsEstella. It was not that I knew I could never bear to speak to him about her,that I knew I could never bear to hear him creak his boots at her, that I knewI could never bear to see him wash his hands of her; it was, that my admirationshould be within a foot or two of him,—it was, that my feelings should be inthe same place with him,—that, was the agonizing circumstance.
We played until nine o'clock, and then it was arranged that when Estella cameto London I should be forewarned of her coming and should meet her at thecoach; and then I took leave of her, and touched her and left her.
My guardian lay at the Boar in the next room to mine. Far into the night, MissHavisham's words, "Love her, love her, love her!" sounded in my ears. I adaptedthem for my own repetition, and said to my pillow, "I love her, I love her, Ilove her!" hundreds of times. Then, a burst of gratitude came upon me, that sheshould be destined for me, once the blacksmith's boy. Then I thought if shewere, as I feared, by no means rapturously grateful for that destiny yet, whenwould she begin to be interested in me? When should I awaken the heart withinher that was mute and sleeping now?
Ah me! I thought those were high and great emotions. But I never thought therewas anything low and small in my keeping away from Joe, because I knew shewould be contemptuous of him. It was but a day gone, and Joe had brought thetears into my eyes; they had soon dried, God forgive me! soon dried.
