
Chapter III.
It wasa rimy morning, and very damp. I had seen the damp lying on the outside of mylittle window, as if some goblin had been crying there all night, and using thewindow for a pocket-handkerchief. Now, I saw the damp lying on the bare hedgesand spare grass, like a coarser sort of spiders' webs; hanging itself from twigto twig and blade to blade. On every rail and gate, wet lay clammy, and themarsh mist was so thick, that the wooden finger on the post directing people toour village—a direction which they never accepted, for they never camethere—was invisible to me until I was quite close under it. Then, as I lookedup at it, while it dripped, it seemed to my oppressed conscience like a phantomdevoting me to the Hulks.
The mist was heavier yet when I got out upon the marshes, so that instead of myrunning at everything, everything seemed to run at me. This was verydisagreeable to a guilty mind. The gates and dikes and banks came bursting atme through the mist, as if they cried as plainly as could be, "A boy withsomebody else's pork pie! Stop him!" The cattle came upon me with likesuddenness, staring out of their eyes, and steaming out of their nostrils,"Halloa, young thief!" One black ox, with a white cravat on,—who even had to myawakened conscience something of a clerical air,—fixed me so obstinately withhis eyes, and moved his blunt head round in such an accusatory manner as Imoved round, that I blubbered out to him, "I couldn't help it, sir! It wasn'tfor myself I took it!" Upon which he put down his head, blew a cloud of smokeout of his nose, and vanished with a kick-up of his hind-legs and a flourish ofhis tail.
All this time, I was getting on towards the river; but however fast I went, Icouldn't warm my feet, to which the damp cold seemed riveted, as the iron wasriveted to the leg of the man I was running to meet. I knew my way to theBattery, pretty straight, for I had been down there on a Sunday with Joe, andJoe, sitting on an old gun, had told me that when I was 'prentice to him,regularly bound, we would have such Larks there! However, in the confusion ofthe mist, I found myself at last too far to the right, and consequently had totry back along the river-side, on the bank of loose stones above the mud andthe stakes that staked the tide out. Making my way along here with alldespatch, I had just crossed a ditch which I knew to be very near the Battery,and had just scrambled up the mound beyond the ditch, when I saw the mansitting before me. His back was towards me, and he had his arms folded, and wasnodding forward, heavy with sleep.
I thought he would be more glad if I came upon him with his breakfast, in thatunexpected manner, so I went forward softly and touched him on the shoulder. Heinstantly jumped up, and it was not the same man, but another man!
And yet this man was dressed in coarse grey, too, and had a great iron on hisleg, and was lame, and hoarse, and cold, and was everything that the other manwas; except that he had not the same face, and had a flat broad-brimmedlow-crowned felt hat on. All this I saw in a moment, for I had only a moment tosee it in: he swore an oath at me, made a hit at me,—it was a round weak blowthat missed me and almost knocked himself down, for it made him stumble,—andthen he ran into the mist, stumbling twice as he went, and I lost him.
"It's the young man!" I thought, feeling my heart shoot as I identified him. Idare say I should have felt a pain in my liver, too, if I had known where itwas.
I was soon at the Battery after that, and there was the right man,—hugginghimself and limping to and fro, as if he had never all night left off huggingand limping,—waiting for me. He was awfully cold, to be sure. I half expectedto see him drop down before my face and die of deadly cold. His eyes looked soawfully hungry too, that when I handed him the file and he laid it down on thegrass, it occurred to me he would have tried to eat it, if he had not seen mybundle. He did not turn me upside down this time to get at what I had, but leftme right side upwards while I opened the bundle and emptied my pockets.
"What's in the bottle, boy?" said he.
"Brandy," said I.
He was already handing mincemeat down his throat in the most curiousmanner,—more like a man who was putting it away somewhere in a violent hurry,than a man who was eating it,—but he left off to take some of the liquor. Heshivered all the while so violently, that it was quite as much as he could doto keep the neck of the bottle between his teeth, without biting it off.
"I think you have got the ague," said I.
"I'm much of your opinion, boy," said he.
"It's bad about here," I told him. "You've been lying out on the meshes, andthey're dreadful aguish. Rheumatic too."
"I'll eat my breakfast afore they're the death of me," said he. "I'd do that,if I was going to be strung up to that there gallows as there is over there,directly afterwards. I'll beat the shivers so far, I'll bet you."
He was gobbling mincemeat, meatbone, bread, cheese, and pork pie, all at once:staring distrustfully while he did so at the mist all round us, and oftenstopping—even stopping his jaws—to listen. Some real or fancied sound, someclink upon the river or breathing of beast upon the marsh, now gave him astart, and he said, suddenly,—
"You're not a deceiving imp? You brought no one with you?"
"No, sir! No!"
"Nor giv' no one the office to follow you?"
"No!"
"Well," said he, "I believe you. You'd be but a fierce young hound indeed, ifat your time of life you could help to hunt a wretched warmint hunted as neardeath and dunghill as this poor wretched warmint is!"
Something clicked in his throat as if he had works in him like a clock, and wasgoing to strike. And he smeared his ragged rough sleeve over his eyes.
Pitying his desolation, and watching him as he gradually settled down upon thepie, I made bold to say, "I am glad you enjoy it."
"Did you speak?"
"I said I was glad you enjoyed it."
"Thankee, my boy. I do."
I had often watched a large dog of ours eating his food; and I now noticed adecided similarity between the dog's way of eating, and the man's. The man tookstrong sharp sudden bites, just like the dog. He swallowed, or rather snappedup, every mouthful, too soon and too fast; and he looked sideways here andthere while he ate, as if he thought there was danger in every direction ofsomebody's coming to take the pie away. He was altogether too unsettled in hismind over it, to appreciate it comfortably I thought, or to have anybody todine with him, without making a chop with his jaws at the visitor. In all ofwhich particulars he was very like the dog.
"I am afraid you won't leave any of it for him," said I, timidly; after asilence during which I had hesitated as to the politeness of making the remark."There's no more to be got where that came from." It was the certainty of thisfact that impelled me to offer the hint.
"Leave any for him? Who's him?" said my friend, stopping in his crunching ofpie-crust.
"The young man. That you spoke of. That was hid with you."
"Oh ah!" he returned, with something like a gruff laugh. "Him? Yes, yes!He don't want no wittles."
"I thought he looked as if he did," said I.
The man stopped eating, and regarded me with the keenest scrutiny and thegreatest surprise.
"Looked? When?"
"Just now."
"Where?"
"Yonder," said I, pointing; "over there, where I found him nodding asleep, andthought it was you."
He held me by the collar and stared at me so, that I began to think his firstidea about cutting my throat had revived.
"Dressed like you, you know, only with a hat," I explained, trembling;"and—and"—I was very anxious to put this delicately—"and with—the same reasonfor wanting to borrow a file. Didn't you hear the cannon last night?"
"Then there was firing!" he said to himself.
"I wonder you shouldn't have been sure of that," I returned, "for we heard itup at home, and that's farther away, and we were shut in besides."
"Why, see now!" said he. "When a man's alone on these flats, with a light headand a light stomach, perishing of cold and want, he hears nothin' all night,but guns firing, and voices calling. Hears? He sees the soldiers, with theirred coats lighted up by the torches carried afore, closing in round him. Hearshis number called, hears himself challenged, hears the rattle of the muskets,hears the orders ‘Make ready! Present! Cover him steady, men!' and is laidhands on—and there's nothin'! Why, if I see one pursuing party lastnight—coming up in order, Damn 'em, with their tramp, tramp—I see a hundred.And as to firing! Why, I see the mist shake with the cannon, arter it was broadday,—But this man"; he had said all the rest, as if he had forgotten my beingthere; "did you notice anything in him?"
"He had a badly bruised face," said I, recalling what I hardly knew I knew.
"Not here?" exclaimed the man, striking his left cheek mercilessly, with theflat of his hand.
"Yes, there!"
"Where is he?" He crammed what little food was left, into the breast of hisgrey jacket. "Show me the way he went. I'll pull him down, like a bloodhound.Curse this iron on my sore leg! Give us hold of the file, boy."
I indicated in what direction the mist had shrouded the other man, and helooked up at it for an instant. But he was down on the rank wet grass, filingat his iron like a madman, and not minding me or minding his own leg, which hadan old chafe upon it and was bloody, but which he handled as roughly as if ithad no more feeling in it than the file. I was very much afraid of him again,now that he had worked himself into this fierce hurry, and I was likewise verymuch afraid of keeping away from home any longer. I told him I must go, but hetook no notice, so I thought the best thing I could do was to slip off. Thelast I saw of him, his head was bent over his knee and he was working hard athis fetter, muttering impatient imprecations at it and at his leg. The last Iheard of him, I stopped in the mist to listen, and the file was still going.
