
Chapter XXX.
Afterwell considering the matter while I was dressing at the Blue Boar in themorning, I resolved to tell my guardian that I doubted Orlick's being the rightsort of man to fill a post of trust at Miss Havisham's. "Why of course he isnot the right sort of man, Pip," said my guardian, comfortably satisfiedbeforehand on the general head, "because the man who fills the post of trustnever is the right sort of man." It seemed quite to put him into spirits tofind that this particular post was not exceptionally held by the right sort ofman, and he listened in a satisfied manner while I told him what knowledge Ihad of Orlick. "Very good, Pip," he observed, when I had concluded, "I'll goround presently, and pay our friend off." Rather alarmed by this summaryaction, I was for a little delay, and even hinted that our friend himself mightbe difficult to deal with. "Oh no he won't," said my guardian, making hispocket-handkerchief-point, with perfect confidence; "I should like to see himargue the question with me."
As we were going back together to London by the midday coach, and as Ibreakfasted under such terrors of Pumblechook that I could scarcely hold mycup, this gave me an opportunity of saying that I wanted a walk, and that Iwould go on along the London road while Mr. Jaggers was occupied, if he wouldlet the coachman know that I would get into my place when overtaken. I was thusenabled to fly from the Blue Boar immediately after breakfast. By then making aloop of about a couple of miles into the open country at the back ofPumblechook's premises, I got round into the High Street again, a little beyondthat pitfall, and felt myself in comparative security.
It was interesting to be in the quiet old town once more, and it was notdisagreeable to be here and there suddenly recognised and stared after. One ortwo of the tradespeople even darted out of their shops and went a little waydown the street before me, that they might turn, as if they had forgottensomething, and pass me face to face,—on which occasions I don't know whetherthey or I made the worse pretence; they of not doing it, or I of not seeing it.Still my position was a distinguished one, and I was not at all dissatisfiedwith it, until Fate threw me in the way of that unlimited miscreant, Trabb'sboy.
Casting my eyes along the street at a certain point of my progress, I beheldTrabb's boy approaching, lashing himself with an empty blue bag. Deeming that aserene and unconscious contemplation of him would best beseem me, and would bemost likely to quell his evil mind, I advanced with that expression ofcountenance, and was rather congratulating myself on my success, when suddenlythe knees of Trabb's boy smote together, his hair uprose, his cap fell off, hetrembled violently in every limb, staggered out into the road, and crying tothe populace, "Hold me! I'm so frightened!" feigned to be in a paroxysm ofterror and contrition, occasioned by the dignity of my appearance. As I passedhim, his teeth loudly chattered in his head, and with every mark of extremehumiliation, he prostrated himself in the dust.
This was a hard thing to bear, but this was nothing. I had not advanced anothertwo hundred yards when, to my inexpressible terror, amazement, and indignation,I again beheld Trabb's boy approaching. He was coming round a narrow corner.His blue bag was slung over his shoulder, honest industry beamed in his eyes, adetermination to proceed to Trabb's with cheerful briskness was indicated inhis gait. With a shock he became aware of me, and was severely visited asbefore; but this time his motion was rotatory, and he staggered round and roundme with knees more afflicted, and with uplifted hands as if beseeching formercy. His sufferings were hailed with the greatest joy by a knot ofspectators, and I felt utterly confounded.
I had not got as much further down the street as the post-office, when I againbeheld Trabb's boy shooting round by a back way. This time, he was entirelychanged. He wore the blue bag in the manner of my great-coat, and was struttingalong the pavement towards me on the opposite side of the street, attended by acompany of delighted young friends to whom he from time to time exclaimed, witha wave of his hand, "Don't know yah!" Words cannot state the amount ofaggravation and injury wreaked upon me by Trabb's boy, when passing abreast ofme, he pulled up his shirt-collar, twined his side-hair, stuck an arm akimbo,and smirked extravagantly by, wriggling his elbows and body, and drawling tohis attendants, "Don't know yah, don't know yah, 'pon my soul don't know yah!"The disgrace attendant on his immediately afterwards taking to crowing andpursuing me across the bridge with crows, as from an exceedingly dejected fowlwho had known me when I was a blacksmith, culminated the disgrace with which Ileft the town, and was, so to speak, ejected by it into the open country.




But unless I had taken the life of Trabb's boy on that occasion, I really donot even now see what I could have done save endure. To have struggled with himin the street, or to have exacted any lower recompense from him than hisheart's best blood, would have been futile and degrading. Moreover, he was aboy whom no man could hurt; an invulnerable and dodging serpent who, whenchased into a corner, flew out again between his captor's legs, scornfullyyelping. I wrote, however, to Mr. Trabb by next day's post, to say that Mr. Pipmust decline to deal further with one who could so far forget what he owed tothe best interests of society, as to employ a boy who excited Loathing in everyrespectable mind.
The coach, with Mr. Jaggers inside, came up in due time, and I took my box-seatagain, and arrived in London safe,—but not sound, for my heart was gone. Assoon as I arrived, I sent a penitential codfish and barrel of oysters to Joe(as reparation for not having gone myself), and then went on to Barnard's Inn.
I found Herbert dining on cold meat, and delighted to welcome me back. Havingdespatched The Avenger to the coffee-house for an addition to the dinner, Ifelt that I must open my breast that very evening to my friend and chum. Asconfidence was out of the question with The Avenger in the hall, which couldmerely be regarded in the light of an antechamber to the keyhole, I sent him tothe Play. A better proof of the severity of my bondage to that taskmaster couldscarcely be afforded, than the degrading shifts to which I was constantlydriven to find him employment. So mean is extremity, that I sometimes sent himto Hyde Park corner to see what o'clock it was.
Dinner done and we sitting with our feet upon the fender, I said to Herbert,"My dear Herbert, I have something very particular to tell you."
"My dear Handel," he returned, "I shall esteem and respect your confidence."
"It concerns myself, Herbert," said I, "and one other person."
Herbert crossed his feet, looked at the fire with his head on one side, andhaving looked at it in vain for some time, looked at me because I didn't go on.
"Herbert," said I, laying my hand upon his knee, "I love—I adore—Estella."
Instead of being transfixed, Herbert replied in an easy matter-of-course way,"Exactly. Well?"
"Well, Herbert? Is that all you say? Well?"
"What next, I mean?" said Herbert. "Of course I know that."
"How do you know it?" said I.
"How do I know it, Handel? Why, from you."
"I never told you."
"Told me! You have never told me when you have got your hair cut, but I havehad senses to perceive it. You have always adored her, ever since I have knownyou. You brought your adoration and your portmanteau here together. Told me!Why, you have always told me all day long. When you told me your own story, youtold me plainly that you began adoring her the first time you saw her, when youwere very young indeed."
"Very well, then," said I, to whom this was a new and not unwelcome light, "Ihave never left off adoring her. And she has come back, a most beautiful andmost elegant creature. And I saw her yesterday. And if I adored her before, Inow doubly adore her."
"Lucky for you then, Handel," said Herbert, "that you are picked out for herand allotted to her. Without encroaching on forbidden ground, we may venture tosay that there can be no doubt between ourselves of that fact. Have you anyidea yet, of Estella's views on the adoration question?"
I shook my head gloomily. "Oh! She is thousands of miles away, from me," saidI.
"Patience, my dear Handel: time enough, time enough. But you have somethingmore to say?"
"I am ashamed to say it," I returned, "and yet it's no worse to say it than tothink it. You call me a lucky fellow. Of course, I am. I was a blacksmith's boybut yesterday; I am—what shall I say I am—to-day?"
"Say a good fellow, if you want a phrase," returned Herbert, smiling, andclapping his hand on the back of mine—"a good fellow, with impetuosity andhesitation, boldness and diffidence, action and dreaming, curiously mixed inhim."
I stopped for a moment to consider whether there really was this mixture in mycharacter. On the whole, I by no means recognised the analysis, but thought itnot worth disputing.
"When I ask what I am to call myself to-day, Herbert," I went on, "I suggestwhat I have in my thoughts. You say I am lucky. I know I have done nothing toraise myself in life, and that Fortune alone has raised me; that is being verylucky. And yet, when I think of Estella—"
("And when don't you, you know?" Herbert threw in, with his eyes on the fire;which I thought kind and sympathetic of him.)
"—Then, my dear Herbert, I cannot tell you how dependent and uncertain I feel,and how exposed to hundreds of chances. Avoiding forbidden ground, as you didjust now, I may still say that on the constancy of one person (naming noperson) all my expectations depend. And at the best, how indefinite andunsatisfactory, only to know so vaguely what they are!" In saying this, Irelieved my mind of what had always been there, more or less, though no doubtmost since yesterday.
"Now, Handel," Herbert replied, in his gay, hopeful way, "it seems to me thatin the despondency of the tender passion, we are looking into our gift-horse'smouth with a magnifying-glass. Likewise, it seems to me that, concentrating ourattention on the examination, we altogether overlook one of the best points ofthe animal. Didn't you tell me that your guardian, Mr. Jaggers, told you in thebeginning, that you were not endowed with expectations only? And even if he hadnot told you so,—though that is a very large If, I grant,—could you believethat of all men in London, Mr. Jaggers is the man to hold his present relationstowards you unless he were sure of his ground?"
I said I could not deny that this was a strong point. I said it (people oftendo so, in such cases) like a rather reluctant concession to truth andjustice;—as if I wanted to deny it!
"I should think it was a strong point," said Herbert, "and I shouldthink you would be puzzled to imagine a stronger; as to the rest, you must bideyour guardian's time, and he must bide his client's time. You'll beone-and-twenty before you know where you are, and then perhaps you'll get somefurther enlightenment. At all events, you'll be nearer getting it, for it mustcome at last."
"What a hopeful disposition you have!" said I, gratefully admiring his cheeryways.
"I ought to have," said Herbert, "for I have not much else. I must acknowledge,by the by, that the good sense of what I have just said is not my own, but myfather's. The only remark I ever heard him make on your story, was the finalone, "The thing is settled and done, or Mr. Jaggers would not be in it." Andnow before I say anything more about my father, or my father's son, and repayconfidence with confidence, I want to make myself seriously disagreeable to youfor a moment,—positively repulsive."
"You won't succeed," said I.
"O yes I shall!" said he. "One, two, three, and now I am in for it. Handel, mygood fellow;"—though he spoke in this light tone, he was very much inearnest,—"I have been thinking since we have been talking with our feet on thisfender, that Estella surely cannot be a condition of your inheritance, if shewas never referred to by your guardian. Am I right in so understanding what youhave told me, as that he never referred to her, directly or indirectly, in anyway? Never even hinted, for instance, that your patron might have views as toyour marriage ultimately?"
"Never."
"Now, Handel, I am quite free from the flavour of sour grapes, upon my soul andhonour! Not being bound to her, can you not detach yourself from her?—I toldyou I should be disagreeable."
I turned my head aside, for, with a rush and a sweep, like the old marsh windscoming up from the sea, a feeling like that which had subdued me on the morningwhen I left the forge, when the mists were solemnly rising, and when I laid myhand upon the village finger-post, smote upon my heart again. There was silencebetween us for a little while.
"Yes; but my dear Handel," Herbert went on, as if we had been talking, insteadof silent, "its having been so strongly rooted in the breast of a boy whomnature and circumstances made so romantic, renders it very serious. Think ofher bringing-up, and think of Miss Havisham. Think of what she is herself (nowI am repulsive and you abominate me). This may lead to miserable things."
"I know it, Herbert," said I, with my head still turned away, "but I can't helpit."
"You can't detach yourself?"
"No. Impossible!"
"You can't try, Handel?"
"No. Impossible!"
"Well!" said Herbert, getting up with a lively shake as if he had been asleep,and stirring the fire, "now I'll endeavour to make myself agreeable again!"
So he went round the room and shook the curtains out, put the chairs in theirplaces, tidied the books and so forth that were lying about, looked into thehall, peeped into the letter-box, shut the door, and came back to his chair bythe fire: where he sat down, nursing his left leg in both arms.
"I was going to say a word or two, Handel, concerning my father and my father'sson. I am afraid it is scarcely necessary for my father's son to remark that myfather's establishment is not particularly brilliant in its housekeeping."
"There is always plenty, Herbert," said I, to say something encouraging.
"O yes! and so the dustman says, I believe, with the strongest approval, and sodoes the marine-store shop in the back street. Gravely, Handel, for the subjectis grave enough, you know how it is as well as I do. I suppose there was a timeonce when my father had not given matters up; but if ever there was, the timeis gone. May I ask you if you have ever had an opportunity of remarking, downin your part of the country, that the children of not exactly suitablemarriages are always most particularly anxious to be married?"
This was such a singular question, that I asked him in return, "Is it so?"
"I don't know," said Herbert, "that's what I want to know. Because it isdecidedly the case with us. My poor sister Charlotte, who was next me and diedbefore she was fourteen, was a striking example. Little Jane is the same. Inher desire to be matrimonially established, you might suppose her to havepassed her short existence in the perpetual contemplation of domestic bliss.Little Alick in a frock has already made arrangements for his union with asuitable young person at Kew. And indeed, I think we are all engaged, exceptthe baby."
"Then you are?" said I.
"I am," said Herbert; "but it's a secret."
I assured him of my keeping the secret, and begged to be favoured with furtherparticulars. He had spoken so sensibly and feelingly of my weakness that Iwanted to know something about his strength.
"May I ask the name?" I said.
"Name of Clara," said Herbert.
"Live in London?"
"Yes, perhaps I ought to mention," said Herbert, who had become curiouslycrestfallen and meek, since we entered on the interesting theme, "that she israther below my mother's nonsensical family notions. Her father had to do withthe victualling of passenger-ships. I think he was a species of purser."
"What is he now?" said I.
"He's an invalid now," replied Herbert.
"Living on—?"
"On the first floor," said Herbert. Which was not at all what I meant, for Ihad intended my question to apply to his means. "I have never seen him, for hehas always kept his room overhead, since I have known Clara. But I have heardhim constantly. He makes tremendous rows,—roars, and pegs at the floor withsome frightful instrument." In looking at me and then laughing heartily,Herbert for the time recovered his usual lively manner.
"Don't you expect to see him?" said I.
"O yes, I constantly expect to see him," returned Herbert, "because I neverhear him, without expecting him to come tumbling through the ceiling. But Idon't know how long the rafters may hold."
When he had once more laughed heartily, he became meek again, and told me thatthe moment he began to realise Capital, it was his intention to marry thisyoung lady. He added as a self-evident proposition, engendering low spirits,"But you can't marry, you know, while you're looking about you."
As we contemplated the fire, and as I thought what a difficult vision torealise this same Capital sometimes was, I put my hands in my pockets. A foldedpiece of paper in one of them attracting my attention, I opened it and found itto be the play-bill I had received from Joe, relative to the celebratedprovincial amateur of Roscian renown. "And bless my heart," I involuntarilyadded aloud, "it's to-night!"
This changed the subject in an instant, and made us hurriedly resolve to go tothe play. So, when I had pledged myself to comfort and abet Herbert in theaffair of his heart by all practicable and impracticable means, and whenHerbert had told me that his affianced already knew me by reputation and that Ishould be presented to her, and when we had warmly shaken hands upon our mutualconfidence, we blew out our candles, made up our fire, locked our door, andissued forth in quest of Mr. Wopsle and Denmark.
