
Chapter XXXI.
On ourarrival in Denmark, we found the king and queen of that country elevated in twoarm-chairs on a kitchen-table, holding a Court. The whole of the Danishnobility were in attendance; consisting of a noble boy in the wash-leatherboots of a gigantic ancestor, a venerable Peer with a dirty face who seemed tohave risen from the people late in life, and the Danish chivalry with a comb inits hair and a pair of white silk legs, and presenting on the whole a feminineappearance. My gifted townsman stood gloomily apart, with folded arms, and Icould have wished that his curls and forehead had been more probable.
Several curious little circumstances transpired as the action proceeded. Thelate king of the country not only appeared to have been troubled with a coughat the time of his decease, but to have taken it with him to the tomb, and tohave brought it back. The royal phantom also carried a ghostly manuscript roundits truncheon, to which it had the appearance of occasionally referring, andthat too, with an air of anxiety and a tendency to lose the place of referencewhich were suggestive of a state of mortality. It was this, I conceive, whichled to the Shade's being advised by the gallery to "turn over!"—arecommendation which it took extremely ill. It was likewise to be noted of thismajestic spirit, that whereas it always appeared with an air of having been outa long time and walked an immense distance, it perceptibly came from a closelycontiguous wall. This occasioned its terrors to be received derisively. TheQueen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen, wasconsidered by the public to have too much brass about her; her chin beingattached to her diadem by a broad band of that metal (as if she had a gorgeoustoothache), her waist being encircled by another, and each of her arms byanother, so that she was openly mentioned as "the kettle-drum." The noble boyin the ancestral boots was inconsistent, representing himself, as it were inone breath, as an able seaman, a strolling actor, a grave-digger, a clergyman,and a person of the utmost importance at a Court fencing-match, on theauthority of whose practised eye and nice discrimination the finest strokeswere judged. This gradually led to a want of toleration for him, and even—onhis being detected in holy orders, and declining to perform the funeralservice—to the general indignation taking the form of nuts. Lastly, Ophelia wasa prey to such slow musical madness, that when, in course of time, she hadtaken off her white muslin scarf, folded it up, and buried it, a sulky man whohad been long cooling his impatient nose against an iron bar in the front rowof the gallery, growled, "Now the baby's put to bed let's have supper!" Which,to say the least of it, was out of keeping.
Upon my unfortunate townsman all these incidents accumulated with playfuleffect. Whenever that undecided Prince had to ask a question or state a doubt,the public helped him out with it. As for example; on the question whether'twas nobler in the mind to suffer, some roared yes, and some no, and someinclining to both opinions said "Toss up for it;" and quite a Debating Societyarose. When he asked what should such fellows as he do crawling between earthand heaven, he was encouraged with loud cries of "Hear, hear!" When he appearedwith his stocking disordered (its disorder expressed, according to usage, byone very neat fold in the top, which I suppose to be always got up with a flatiron), a conversation took place in the gallery respecting the paleness of hisleg, and whether it was occasioned by the turn the ghost had given him. On histaking the recorders,—very like a little black flute that had just been playedin the orchestra and handed out at the door,—he was called upon unanimously forRule Britannia. When he recommended the player not to saw the air thus, thesulky man said, "And don't you do it, neither; you're a deal worse thanhim!" And I grieve to add that peals of laughter greeted Mr. Wopsle onevery one of these occasions.
But his greatest trials were in the churchyard, which had the appearance of aprimeval forest, with a kind of small ecclesiastical wash-house on one side,and a turnpike gate on the other. Mr. Wopsle in a comprehensive black cloak,being descried entering at the turnpike, the gravedigger was admonished in afriendly way, "Look out! Here's the undertaker a coming, to see how you're agetting on with your work!" I believe it is well known in a constitutionalcountry that Mr. Wopsle could not possibly have returned the skull, aftermoralizing over it, without dusting his fingers on a white napkin taken fromhis breast; but even that innocent and indispensable action did not passwithout the comment, "Wai-ter!" The arrival of the body for interment (in anempty black box with the lid tumbling open), was the signal for a general joy,which was much enhanced by the discovery, among the bearers, of an individualobnoxious to identification. The joy attended Mr. Wopsle through his strugglewith Laertes on the brink of the orchestra and the grave, and slackened no moreuntil he had tumbled the king off the kitchen-table, and had died by inchesfrom the ankles upward.
We had made some pale efforts in the beginning to applaud Mr. Wopsle; but theywere too hopeless to be persisted in. Therefore we had sat, feeling keenly forhim, but laughing, nevertheless, from ear to ear. I laughed in spite of myselfall the time, the whole thing was so droll; and yet I had a latent impressionthat there was something decidedly fine in Mr. Wopsle's elocution,—not for oldassociations' sake, I am afraid, but because it was very slow, very dreary,very uphill and downhill, and very unlike any way in which any man in anynatural circumstances of life or death ever expressed himself about anything.When the tragedy was over, and he had been called for and hooted, I said toHerbert, "Let us go at once, or perhaps we shall meet him."
We made all the haste we could downstairs, but we were not quick enough either.Standing at the door was a Jewish man with an unnatural heavy smear of eyebrow,who caught my eyes as we advanced, and said, when we came up with him,—
"Mr. Pip and friend?"
Identity of Mr. Pip and friend confessed.
"Mr. Waldengarver," said the man, "would be glad to have the honour."
"Waldengarver?" I repeated—when Herbert murmured in my ear, "Probably Wopsle."
"Oh!" said I. "Yes. Shall we follow you?"
"A few steps, please." When we were in a side alley, he turned and asked, "Howdid you think he looked?—I dressed him."
I don't know what he had looked like, except a funeral; with the addition of alarge Danish sun or star hanging round his neck by a blue ribbon, that hadgiven him the appearance of being insured in some extraordinary Fire Office.But I said he had looked very nice.
"When he come to the grave," said our conductor, "he showed his cloakbeautiful. But, judging from the wing, it looked to me that when he see theghost in the queen's apartment, he might have made more of his stockings."
I modestly assented, and we all fell through a little dirty swing door, into asort of hot packing-case immediately behind it. Here Mr. Wopsle was divestinghimself of his Danish garments, and here there was just room for us to look athim over one another's shoulders, by keeping the packing-case door, or lid,wide open.
"Gentlemen," said Mr. Wopsle, "I am proud to see you. I hope, Mr. Pip, you willexcuse my sending round. I had the happiness to know you in former times, andthe Drama has ever had a claim which has ever been acknowledged, on the nobleand the affluent."
Meanwhile, Mr. Waldengarver, in a frightful perspiration, was trying to gethimself out of his princely sables.
"Skin the stockings off Mr. Waldengarver," said the owner of that property, "oryou'll bust 'em. Bust 'em, and you'll bust five-and-thirty shillings.Shakspeare never was complimented with a finer pair. Keep quiet in your chairnow, and leave 'em to me."
With that, he went upon his knees, and began to flay his victim; who, on thefirst stocking coming off, would certainly have fallen over backward with hischair, but for there being no room to fall anyhow.
I had been afraid until then to say a word about the play. But then, Mr.Waldengarver looked up at us complacently, and said,—
"Gentlemen, how did it seem to you, to go, in front?"
Herbert said from behind (at the same time poking me), "Capitally." So I said"Capitally."
"How did you like my reading of the character, gentlemen?" said Mr.Waldengarver, almost, if not quite, with patronage.
Herbert said from behind (again poking me), "Massive and concrete." So I saidboldly, as if I had originated it, and must beg to insist upon it, "Massive andconcrete."
"I am glad to have your approbation, gentlemen," said Mr. Waldengarver, with anair of dignity, in spite of his being ground against the wall at the time, andholding on by the seat of the chair.
"But I'll tell you one thing, Mr. Waldengarver," said the man who was on hisknees, "in which you're out in your reading. Now mind! I don't care who sayscontrairy; I tell you so. You're out in your reading of Hamlet when you getyour legs in profile. The last Hamlet as I dressed, made the same mistakes inhis reading at rehearsal, till I got him to put a large red wafer on each ofhis shins, and then at that rehearsal (which was the last) I went in front,sir, to the back of the pit, and whenever his reading brought him into profile,I called out "I don't see no wafers!" And at night his reading was lovely."
Mr. Waldengarver smiled at me, as much as to say "a faithful Dependent—Ioverlook his folly;" and then said aloud, "My view is a little classic andthoughtful for them here; but they will improve, they will improve."
Herbert and I said together, O, no doubt they would improve.
"Did you observe, gentlemen," said Mr. Waldengarver, "that there was a man inthe gallery who endeavoured to cast derision on the service,—I mean, therepresentation?"
We basely replied that we rather thought we had noticed such a man. I added,"He was drunk, no doubt."
"O dear no, sir," said Mr. Wopsle, "not drunk. His employer would see to that,sir. His employer would not allow him to be drunk."
"You know his employer?" said I.
Mr. Wopsle shut his eyes, and opened them again; performing both ceremoniesvery slowly. "You must have observed, gentlemen," said he, "an ignorant and ablatant ass, with a rasping throat and a countenance expressive of lowmalignity, who went through—I will not say sustained—the rôle (if I may use aFrench expression) of Claudius, King of Denmark. That is his employer,gentlemen. Such is the profession!"
Without distinctly knowing whether I should have been more sorry for Mr. Wopsleif he had been in despair, I was so sorry for him as it was, that I took theopportunity of his turning round to have his braces put on,—which jostled usout at the doorway,—to ask Herbert what he thought of having him home tosupper? Herbert said he thought it would be kind to do so; therefore I invitedhim, and he went to Barnard's with us, wrapped up to the eyes, and we did ourbest for him, and he sat until two o'clock in the morning, reviewing hissuccess and developing his plans. I forget in detail what they were, but I havea general recollection that he was to begin with reviving the Drama, and to endwith crushing it; inasmuch as his decease would leave it utterly bereft andwithout a chance or hope.
Miserably I went to bed after all, and miserably thought of Estella, andmiserably dreamed that my expectations were all cancelled, and that I had togive my hand in marriage to Herbert's Clara, or play Hamlet to Miss Havisham'sGhost, before twenty thousand people, without knowing twenty words of it.
