
Chapter XXXII.
Oneday when I was busy with my books and Mr. Pocket, I received a note by thepost, the mere outside of which threw me into a great flutter; for, though Ihad never seen the handwriting in which it was addressed, I divined whose handit was. It had no set beginning, as Dear Mr. Pip, or Dear Pip, or Dear Sir, orDear Anything, but ran thus:—
"I am to come to London the day after to-morrow by the midday coach. I believeit was settled you should meet me? At all events Miss Havisham has thatimpression, and I write in obedience to it. She sends you her regard.
"Yours, ESTELLA."
If there had been time, I should probably have ordered several suits of clothesfor this occasion; but as there was not, I was fain to be content with those Ihad. My appetite vanished instantly, and I knew no peace or rest until the dayarrived. Not that its arrival brought me either; for, then I was worse thanever, and began haunting the coach-office in Wood Street, Cheapside, before thecoach had left the Blue Boar in our town. For all that I knew this perfectlywell, I still felt as if it were not safe to let the coach-office be out of mysight longer than five minutes at a time; and in this condition of unreason Ihad performed the first half-hour of a watch of four or five hours, whenWemmick ran against me.
"Halloa, Mr. Pip," said he; "how do you do? I should hardly have thought thiswas your beat."
I explained that I was waiting to meet somebody who was coming up by coach, andI inquired after the Castle and the Aged.
"Both flourishing thankye," said Wemmick, "and particularly the Aged. He's inwonderful feather. He'll be eighty-two next birthday. I have a notion of firingeighty-two times, if the neighbourhood shouldn't complain, and that cannon ofmine should prove equal to the pressure. However, this is not London talk.Where do you think I am going to?"
"To the office?" said I, for he was tending in that direction.
"Next thing to it," returned Wemmick, "I am going to Newgate. We are in abanker's-parcel case just at present, and I have been down the road taking asquint at the scene of action, and thereupon must have a word or two with ourclient."
"Did your client commit the robbery?" I asked.
"Bless your soul and body, no," answered Wemmick, very drily. "But he isaccused of it. So might you or I be. Either of us might be accused of it, youknow."
"Only neither of us is," I remarked.
"Yah!" said Wemmick, touching me on the breast with his forefinger; "you're adeep one, Mr. Pip! Would you like to have a look at Newgate? Have you time tospare?"
I had so much time to spare, that the proposal came as a relief,notwithstanding its irreconcilability with my latent desire to keep my eye onthe coach-office. Muttering that I would make the inquiry whether I had time towalk with him, I went into the office, and ascertained from the clerk with thenicest precision and much to the trying of his temper, the earliest moment atwhich the coach could be expected,—which I knew beforehand, quite as well ashe. I then rejoined Mr. Wemmick, and affecting to consult my watch, and to besurprised by the information I had received, accepted his offer.
We were at Newgate in a few minutes, and we passed through the lodge where somefetters were hanging up on the bare walls among the prison rules, into theinterior of the jail. At that time jails were much neglected, and the period ofexaggerated reaction consequent on all public wrongdoing—and which is alwaysits heaviest and longest punishment—was still far off. So, felons were notlodged and fed better than soldiers (to say nothing of paupers), and seldom setfire to their prisons with the excusable object of improving the flavour oftheir soup. It was visiting time when Wemmick took me in, and a potman wasgoing his rounds with beer; and the prisoners, behind bars in yards, werebuying beer, and talking to friends; and a frowzy, ugly, disorderly, depressingscene it was.
It struck me that Wemmick walked among the prisoners much as a gardener mightwalk among his plants. This was first put into my head by his seeing a shootthat had come up in the night, and saying, "What, Captain Tom? Are youthere? Ah, indeed!" and also, "Is that Black Bill behind the cistern? Why Ididn't look for you these two months; how do you find yourself?" Equally in hisstopping at the bars and attending to anxious whisperers,—alwayssingly,—Wemmick with his post-office in an immovable state, looked at themwhile in conference, as if he were taking particular notice of the advance theyhad made, since last observed, towards coming out in full blow at their trial.
He was highly popular, and I found that he took the familiar department of Mr.Jaggers's business; though something of the state of Mr. Jaggers hung about himtoo, forbidding approach beyond certain limits. His personal recognition ofeach successive client was comprised in a nod, and in his settling his hat alittle easier on his head with both hands, and then tightening the post-office,and putting his hands in his pockets. In one or two instances there was adifficulty respecting the raising of fees, and then Mr. Wemmick, backing as faras possible from the insufficient money produced, said, "it's no use, my boy.I'm only a subordinate. I can't take it. Don't go on in that way with asubordinate. If you are unable to make up your quantum, my boy, you had betteraddress yourself to a principal; there are plenty of principals in theprofession, you know, and what is not worth the while of one, may be worth thewhile of another; that's my recommendation to you, speaking as a subordinate.Don't try on useless measures. Why should you? Now, who's next?"
Thus, we walked through Wemmick's greenhouse, until he turned to me and said,"Notice the man I shall shake hands with." I should have done so, without thepreparation, as he had shaken hands with no one yet.
Almost as soon as he had spoken, a portly upright man (whom I can see now, as Iwrite) in a well-worn olive-coloured frock-coat, with a peculiar palloroverspreading the red in his complexion, and eyes that went wandering aboutwhen he tried to fix them, came up to a corner of the bars, and put his hand tohis hat—which had a greasy and fatty surface like cold broth—with ahalf-serious and half-jocose military salute.
"Colonel, to you!" said Wemmick; "how are you, Colonel?"
"All right, Mr. Wemmick."
"Everything was done that could be done, but the evidence was too strong forus, Colonel."
"Yes, it was too strong, sir,—but I don't care."
"No, no," said Wemmick, coolly, "you don't care." Then, turning to me,"Served His Majesty this man. Was a soldier in the line and bought hisdischarge."
I said, "Indeed?" and the man's eyes looked at me, and then looked over myhead, and then looked all round me, and then he drew his hand across his lipsand laughed.
"I think I shall be out of this on Monday, sir," he said to Wemmick.
"Perhaps," returned my friend, "but there's no knowing."
"I am glad to have the chance of bidding you good-bye, Mr. Wemmick," said theman, stretching out his hand between two bars.
"Thankye," said Wemmick, shaking hands with him. "Same to you, Colonel."
"If what I had upon me when taken had been real, Mr. Wemmick," said the man,unwilling to let his hand go, "I should have asked the favour of your wearinganother ring—in acknowledgment of your attentions."
"I'll accept the will for the deed," said Wemmick. "By the by; you were quite apigeon-fancier." The man looked up at the sky. "I am told you had a remarkablebreed of tumblers. Could you commission any friend of yours to bring mea pair, if you've no further use for 'em?"
"It shall be done, sir."
"All right," said Wemmick, "they shall be taken care of. Good-afternoon,Colonel. Good-bye!" They shook hands again, and as we walked away Wemmick saidto me, "A Coiner, a very good workman. The Recorder's report is made to-day,and he is sure to be executed on Monday. Still you see, as far as it goes, apair of pigeons are portable property all the same." With that, he looked back,and nodded at this dead plant, and then cast his eyes about him in walking outof the yard, as if he were considering what other pot would go best in itsplace.
As we came out of the prison through the lodge, I found that the greatimportance of my guardian was appreciated by the turnkeys, no less than bythose whom they held in charge. "Well, Mr. Wemmick," said the turnkey, who keptus between the two studded and spiked lodge gates, and who carefully locked onebefore he unlocked the other, "what's Mr. Jaggers going to do with thatwater-side murder? Is he going to make it manslaughter, or what's he going tomake of it?"
"Why don't you ask him?" returned Wemmick.
"O yes, I dare say!" said the turnkey.
"Now, that's the way with them here, Mr. Pip," remarked Wemmick, turning to mewith his post-office elongated. "They don't mind what they ask of me, thesubordinate; but you'll never catch 'em asking any questions of my principal."
"Is this young gentleman one of the 'prentices or articled ones of youroffice?" asked the turnkey, with a grin at Mr. Wemmick's humour.
"There he goes again, you see!" cried Wemmick, "I told you so! Asks anotherquestion of the subordinate before his first is dry! Well, supposing Mr. Pip isone of them?"
"Why then," said the turnkey, grinning again, "he knows what Mr. Jaggers is."
"Yah!" cried Wemmick, suddenly hitting out at the turnkey in a facetious way,"you're dumb as one of your own keys when you have to do with my principal, youknow you are. Let us out, you old fox, or I'll get him to bring an actionagainst you for false imprisonment."
The turnkey laughed, and gave us good day, and stood laughing at us over thespikes of the wicket when we descended the steps into the street.
"Mind you, Mr. Pip," said Wemmick, gravely in my ear, as he took my arm to bemore confidential; "I don't know that Mr. Jaggers does a better thing than theway in which he keeps himself so high. He's always so high. His constant heightis of a piece with his immense abilities. That Colonel durst no more take leaveof him, than that turnkey durst ask him his intentions respecting acase. Then, between his height and them, he slips in his subordinate,—don't yousee?—and so he has 'em, soul and body."
I was very much impressed, and not for the first time, by my guardian'ssubtlety. To confess the truth, I very heartily wished, and not for the firsttime, that I had had some other guardian of minor abilities.
Mr. Wemmick and I parted at the office in Little Britain, where suppliants forMr. Jaggers's notice were lingering about as usual, and I returned to my watchin the street of the coach-office, with some three hours on hand. I consumedthe whole time in thinking how strange it was that I should be encompassed byall this taint of prison and crime; that, in my childhood out on our lonelymarshes on a winter evening, I should have first encountered it; that, itshould have reappeared on two occasions, starting out like a stain that wasfaded but not gone; that, it should in this new way pervade my fortune andadvancement. While my mind was thus engaged, I thought of the beautiful youngEstella, proud and refined, coming towards me, and I thought with absoluteabhorrence of the contrast between the jail and her. I wished that Wemmick hadnot met me, or that I had not yielded to him and gone with him, so that, of alldays in the year on this day, I might not have had Newgate in my breath and onmy clothes. I beat the prison dust off my feet as I sauntered to and fro, and Ishook it out of my dress, and I exhaled its air from my lungs. So contaminateddid I feel, remembering who was coming, that the coach came quickly after all,and I was not yet free from the soiling consciousness of Mr. Wemmick'sconservatory, when I saw her face at the coach window and her hand waving tome.
What was the nameless shadow which again in that one instant had passed?
