
Chapter XXXIII.
In herfurred travelling-dress, Estella seemed more delicately beautiful than she hadever seemed yet, even in my eyes. Her manner was more winning than she hadcared to let it be to me before, and I thought I saw Miss Havisham's influencein the change.
We stood in the Inn Yard while she pointed out her luggage to me, and when itwas all collected I remembered—having forgotten everything but herself in themeanwhile—that I knew nothing of her destination.
"I am going to Richmond," she told me. "Our lesson is, that there are twoRichmonds, one in Surrey and one in Yorkshire, and that mine is the SurreyRichmond. The distance is ten miles. I am to have a carriage, and you are totake me. This is my purse, and you are to pay my charges out of it. O, you musttake the purse! We have no choice, you and I, but to obey our instructions. Weare not free to follow our own devices, you and I."
As she looked at me in giving me the purse, I hoped there was an inner meaningin her words. She said them slightingly, but not with displeasure.
"A carriage will have to be sent for, Estella. Will you rest here a little?"
"Yes, I am to rest here a little, and I am to drink some tea, and you are totake care of me the while."
She drew her arm through mine, as if it must be done, and I requested a waiterwho had been staring at the coach like a man who had never seen such a thing inhis life, to show us a private sitting-room. Upon that, he pulled out a napkin,as if it were a magic clue without which he couldn't find the way upstairs, andled us to the black hole of the establishment, fitted up with a diminishingmirror (quite a superfluous article, considering the hole's proportions), ananchovy sauce-cruet, and somebody's pattens. On my objecting to this retreat,he took us into another room with a dinner-table for thirty, and in the grate ascorched leaf of a copy-book under a bushel of coal-dust. Having looked at thisextinct conflagration and shaken his head, he took my order; which, proving tobe merely, "Some tea for the lady," sent him out of the room in a very lowstate of mind.
I was, and I am, sensible that the air of this chamber, in its strongcombination of stable with soup-stock, might have led one to infer that thecoaching department was not doing well, and that the enterprising proprietorwas boiling down the horses for the refreshment department. Yet the room wasall in all to me, Estella being in it. I thought that with her I could havebeen happy there for life. (I was not at all happy there at the time, observe,and I knew it well.)
"Where are you going to, at Richmond?" I asked Estella.
"I am going to live," said she, "at a great expense, with a lady there, who hasthe power—or says she has—of taking me about, and introducing me, and showingpeople to me and showing me to people."
"I suppose you will be glad of variety and admiration?"
"Yes, I suppose so."
She answered so carelessly, that I said, "You speak of yourself as if you weresome one else."
"Where did you learn how I speak of others? Come, come," said Estella, smilingdelightfully, "you must not expect me to go to school to you; I musttalk in my own way. How do you thrive with Mr. Pocket?"
"I live quite pleasantly there; at least—" It appeared to me that I was losinga chance.
"At least?" repeated Estella.
"As pleasantly as I could anywhere, away from you."
"You silly boy," said Estella, quite composedly, "how can you talk suchnonsense? Your friend Mr. Matthew, I believe, is superior to the rest of hisfamily?"
"Very superior indeed. He is nobody's enemy—"
"Don't add but his own," interposed Estella, "for I hate that class of man. Buthe really is disinterested, and above small jealousy and spite, I have heard?"
"I am sure I have every reason to say so."
"You have not every reason to say so of the rest of his people," said Estella,nodding at me with an expression of face that was at once grave and rallying,"for they beset Miss Havisham with reports and insinuations to yourdisadvantage. They watch you, misrepresent you, write letters about you(anonymous sometimes), and you are the torment and the occupation of theirlives. You can scarcely realise to yourself the hatred those people feel foryou."
"They do me no harm, I hope?"
Instead of answering, Estella burst out laughing. This was very singular to me,and I looked at her in considerable perplexity. When she left off—and she hadnot laughed languidly, but with real enjoyment—I said, in my diffident way withher,—
"I hope I may suppose that you would not be amused if they did me any harm."
"No, no you may be sure of that," said Estella. "You may be certain that Ilaugh because they fail. O, those people with Miss Havisham, and the torturesthey undergo!" She laughed again, and even now when she had told me why, herlaughter was very singular to me, for I could not doubt its being genuine, andyet it seemed too much for the occasion. I thought there must really besomething more here than I knew; she saw the thought in my mind, and answeredit.
"It is not easy for even you." said Estella, "to know what satisfaction itgives me to see those people thwarted, or what an enjoyable sense of theridiculous I have when they are made ridiculous. For you were not brought up inthat strange house from a mere baby. I was. You had not your little witssharpened by their intriguing against you, suppressed and defenceless, underthe mask of sympathy and pity and what not that is soft and soothing. I had.You did not gradually open your round childish eyes wider and wider to thediscovery of that impostor of a woman who calculates her stores of peace ofmind for when she wakes up in the night. I did."
It was no laughing matter with Estella now, nor was she summoning theseremembrances from any shallow place. I would not have been the cause of thatlook of hers for all my expectations in a heap.
"Two things I can tell you," said Estella. "First, notwithstanding the proverbthat constant dropping will wear away a stone, you may set your mind at restthat these people never will—never would in a hundred years—impair your groundwith Miss Havisham, in any particular, great or small. Second, I am beholden toyou as the cause of their being so busy and so mean in vain, and there is myhand upon it."
As she gave it to me playfully,—for her darker mood had been but momentary—Iheld it and put it to my lips. "You ridiculous boy," said Estella, "will younever take warning? Or do you kiss my hand in the same spirit in which I oncelet you kiss my cheek?"
"What spirit was that?" said I.
"I must think a moment. A spirit of contempt for the fawners and plotters."
"If I say yes, may I kiss the cheek again?"
"You should have asked before you touched the hand. But, yes, if you like."
I leaned down, and her calm face was like a statue's. "Now," said Estella,gliding away the instant I touched her cheek, "you are to take care that I havesome tea, and you are to take me to Richmond."
Her reverting to this tone as if our association were forced upon us, and wewere mere puppets, gave me pain; but everything in our intercourse did give mepain. Whatever her tone with me happened to be, I could put no trust in it, andbuild no hope on it; and yet I went on against trust and against hope. Whyrepeat it a thousand times? So it always was.
I rang for the tea, and the waiter, reappearing with his magic clue, brought inby degrees some fifty adjuncts to that refreshment, but of tea not a glimpse. Ateaboard, cups and saucers, plates, knives and forks (including carvers),spoons (various), salt-cellars, a meek little muffin confined with the utmostprecaution under a strong iron cover, Moses in the bulrushes typified by a softbit of butter in a quantity of parsley, a pale loaf with a powdered head, twoproof impressions of the bars of the kitchen fireplace on triangular bits ofbread, and ultimately a fat family urn; which the waiter staggered in with,expressing in his countenance burden and suffering. After a prolonged absenceat this stage of the entertainment, he at length came back with a casket ofprecious appearance containing twigs. These I steeped in hot water, and so fromthe whole of these appliances extracted one cup of I don't know what forEstella.
The bill paid, and the waiter remembered, and the ostler not forgotten, and thechambermaid taken into consideration,—in a word, the whole house bribed into astate of contempt and animosity, and Estella's purse much lightened,—we gotinto our post-coach and drove away. Turning into Cheapside and rattling upNewgate Street, we were soon under the walls of which I was so ashamed.
"What place is that?" Estella asked me.
I made a foolish pretence of not at first recognising it, and then told her. Asshe looked at it, and drew in her head again, murmuring, "Wretches!" I wouldnot have confessed to my visit for any consideration.
"Mr. Jaggers," said I, by way of putting it neatly on somebody else, "has thereputation of being more in the secrets of that dismal place than any man inLondon."
"He is more in the secrets of every place, I think," said Estella, in a lowvoice.
"You have been accustomed to see him often, I suppose?"
"I have been accustomed to see him at uncertain intervals, ever since I canremember. But I know him no better now, than I did before I could speakplainly. What is your own experience of him? Do you advance with him?"
"Once habituated to his distrustful manner," said I, "I have done very well."
"Are you intimate?"
"I have dined with him at his private house."
"I fancy," said Estella, shrinking "that must be a curious place."
"It is a curious place."
I should have been chary of discussing my guardian too freely even with her;but I should have gone on with the subject so far as to describe the dinner inGerrard Street, if we had not then come into a sudden glare of gas. It seemed,while it lasted, to be all alight and alive with that inexplicable feeling Ihad had before; and when we were out of it, I was as much dazed for a fewmoments as if I had been in lightning.
So we fell into other talk, and it was principally about the way by which wewere travelling, and about what parts of London lay on this side of it, andwhat on that. The great city was almost new to her, she told me, for she hadnever left Miss Havisham's neighbourhood until she had gone to France, and shehad merely passed through London then in going and returning. I asked her if myguardian had any charge of her while she remained here? To that sheemphatically said "God forbid!" and no more.
It was impossible for me to avoid seeing that she cared to attract me; that shemade herself winning, and would have won me even if the task had needed pains.Yet this made me none the happier, for even if she had not taken that tone ofour being disposed of by others, I should have felt that she held my heart inher hand because she wilfully chose to do it, and not because it would havewrung any tenderness in her to crush it and throw it away.
When we passed through Hammersmith, I showed her where Mr. Matthew Pocketlived, and said it was no great way from Richmond, and that I hoped I shouldsee her sometimes.
"O yes, you are to see me; you are to come when you think proper; you are to bementioned to the family; indeed you are already mentioned."
I inquired was it a large household she was going to be a member of?
"No; there are only two; mother and daughter. The mother is a lady of somestation, though not averse to increasing her income."
"I wonder Miss Havisham could part with you again so soon."
"It is a part of Miss Havisham's plans for me, Pip," said Estella, with a sigh,as if she were tired; "I am to write to her constantly and see her regularlyand report how I go on,—I and the jewels,—for they are nearly all mine now."
It was the first time she had ever called me by my name. Of course she did sopurposely, and knew that I should treasure it up.
We came to Richmond all too soon, and our destination there was a house by thegreen,—a staid old house, where hoops and powder and patches, embroideredcoats, rolled stockings, ruffles and swords, had had their court days many atime. Some ancient trees before the house were still cut into fashions asformal and unnatural as the hoops and wigs and stiff skirts; but their ownallotted places in the great procession of the dead were not far off, and theywould soon drop into them and go the silent way of the rest.
A bell with an old voice—which I dare say in its time had often said to thehouse, Here is the green farthingale, Here is the diamond-hilted sword, Hereare the shoes with red heels and the blue solitaire—sounded gravely in themoonlight, and two cherry-coloured maids came fluttering out to receiveEstella. The doorway soon absorbed her boxes, and she gave me her hand and asmile, and said good-night, and was absorbed likewise. And still I stoodlooking at the house, thinking how happy I should be if I lived there with her,and knowing that I never was happy with her, but always miserable.
I got into the carriage to be taken back to Hammersmith, and I got in with abad heart-ache, and I got out with a worse heart-ache. At our own door, I foundlittle Jane Pocket coming home from a little party escorted by her littlelover; and I envied her little lover, in spite of his being subject to Flopson.
Mr. Pocket was out lecturing; for, he was a most delightful lecturer ondomestic economy, and his treatises on the management of children and servantswere considered the very best text-books on those themes. But Mrs. Pocket wasat home, and was in a little difficulty, on account of the baby's having beenaccommodated with a needle-case to keep him quiet during the unaccountableabsence (with a relative in the Foot Guards) of Millers. And more needles weremissing than it could be regarded as quite wholesome for a patient of suchtender years either to apply externally or to take as a tonic.
Mr. Pocket being justly celebrated for giving most excellent practical advice,and for having a clear and sound perception of things and a highly judiciousmind, I had some notion in my heart-ache of begging him to accept myconfidence. But happening to look up at Mrs. Pocket as she sat reading her bookof dignities after prescribing Bed as a sovereign remedy for baby, Ithought—Well—No, I wouldn't.
