
Chapter XXXV.
It wasthe first time that a grave had opened in my road of life, and the gap it madein the smooth ground was wonderful. The figure of my sister in her chair by thekitchen fire, haunted me night and day. That the place could possibly be,without her, was something my mind seemed unable to compass; and whereas shehad seldom or never been in my thoughts of late, I had now the strangest ideasthat she was coming towards me in the street, or that she would presently knockat the door. In my rooms too, with which she had never been at all associated,there was at once the blankness of death and a perpetual suggestion of thesound of her voice or the turn of her face or figure, as if she were stillalive and had been often there.
Whatever my fortunes might have been, I could scarcely have recalled my sisterwith much tenderness. But I suppose there is a shock of regret which may existwithout much tenderness. Under its influence (and perhaps to make up for thewant of the softer feeling) I was seized with a violent indignation against theassailant from whom she had suffered so much; and I felt that on sufficientproof I could have revengefully pursued Orlick, or any one else, to the lastextremity.
Having written to Joe, to offer him consolation, and to assure him that I wouldcome to the funeral, I passed the intermediate days in the curious state ofmind I have glanced at. I went down early in the morning, and alighted at theBlue Boar in good time to walk over to the forge.
It was fine summer weather again, and, as I walked along, the times when I wasa little helpless creature, and my sister did not spare me, vividly returned.But they returned with a gentle tone upon them that softened even the edge ofTickler. For now, the very breath of the beans and clover whispered to my heartthat the day must come when it would be well for my memory that others walkingin the sunshine should be softened as they thought of me.
At last I came within sight of the house, and saw that Trabb and Co. had put ina funereal execution and taken possession. Two dismally absurd persons, eachostentatiously exhibiting a crutch done up in a black bandage,—as if thatinstrument could possibly communicate any comfort to anybody,—were posted atthe front door; and in one of them I recognised a postboy discharged from theBoar for turning a young couple into a sawpit on their bridal morning, inconsequence of intoxication rendering it necessary for him to ride his horseclasped round the neck with both arms. All the children of the village, andmost of the women, were admiring these sable warders and the closed windows ofthe house and forge; and as I came up, one of the two warders (the postboy)knocked at the door,—implying that I was far too much exhausted by grief tohave strength remaining to knock for myself.
Another sable warder (a carpenter, who had once eaten two geese for a wager)opened the door, and showed me into the best parlour. Here, Mr. Trabb had takenunto himself the best table, and had got all the leaves up, and was holding akind of black Bazaar, with the aid of a quantity of black pins. At the momentof my arrival, he had just finished putting somebody's hat into blacklong-clothes, like an African baby; so he held out his hand for mine. But I,misled by the action, and confused by the occasion, shook hands with him withevery testimony of warm affection.
Poor dear Joe, entangled in a little black cloak tied in a large bow under hischin, was seated apart at the upper end of the room; where, as chief mourner,he had evidently been stationed by Trabb. When I bent down and said to him,"Dear Joe, how are you?" he said, "Pip, old chap, you knowed her when she werea fine figure of a—" and clasped my hand and said no more.
Biddy, looking very neat and modest in her black dress, went quietly here andthere, and was very helpful. When I had spoken to Biddy, as I thought it not atime for talking I went and sat down near Joe, and there began to wonder inwhat part of the house it—she—my sister—was. The air of the parlour being faintwith the smell of sweet-cake, I looked about for the table of refreshments; itwas scarcely visible until one had got accustomed to the gloom, but there was acut-up plum cake upon it, and there were cut-up oranges, and sandwiches, andbiscuits, and two decanters that I knew very well as ornaments, but had neverseen used in all my life; one full of port, and one of sherry. Standing at thistable, I became conscious of the servile Pumblechook in a black cloak andseveral yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself, and makingobsequious movements to catch my attention. The moment he succeeded, he cameover to me (breathing sherry and crumbs), and said in a subdued voice, "May I,dear sir?" and did. I then descried Mr. and Mrs. Hubble; the last-named in adecent speechless paroxysm in a corner. We were all going to "follow," and wereall in course of being tied up separately (by Trabb) into ridiculous bundles.
"Which I meantersay, Pip," Joe whispered me, as we were being what Mr. Trabbcalled "formed" in the parlour, two and two,—and it was dreadfully like apreparation for some grim kind of dance; "which I meantersay, sir, as I wouldin preference have carried her to the church myself, along with three or fourfriendly ones wot come to it with willing harts and arms, but it wereconsidered wot the neighbours would look down on such and would be of opinionsas it were wanting in respect."
"Pocket-handkerchiefs out, all!" cried Mr. Trabb at this point, in a depressedbusiness-like voice. "Pocket-handkerchiefs out! We are ready!"
So we all put our pocket-handkerchiefs to our faces, as if our noses werebleeding, and filed out two and two; Joe and I; Biddy and Pumblechook; Mr. andMrs. Hubble. The remains of my poor sister had been brought round by thekitchen door, and, it being a point of Undertaking ceremony that the sixbearers must be stifled and blinded under a horrible black velvet housing witha white border, the whole looked like a blind monster with twelve human legs,shuffling and blundering along, under the guidance of two keepers,—the postboyand his comrade.
The neighbourhood, however, highly approved of these arrangements, and we weremuch admired as we went through the village; the more youthful and vigorouspart of the community making dashes now and then to cut us off, and lying inwait to intercept us at points of vantage. At such times the more exuberantamong them called out in an excited manner on our emergence round some cornerof expectancy, "Here they come!" "Here they are!" and we were allbut cheered. In this progress I was much annoyed by the abject Pumblechook,who, being behind me, persisted all the way as a delicate attention inarranging my streaming hatband, and smoothing my cloak. My thoughts werefurther distracted by the excessive pride of Mr. and Mrs. Hubble, who weresurpassingly conceited and vainglorious in being members of so distinguished aprocession.
And now the range of marshes lay clear before us, with the sails of the shipson the river growing out of it; and we went into the churchyard, close to thegraves of my unknown parents, Philip Pirrip, late of this parish, and AlsoGeorgiana, Wife of the Above. And there, my sister was laid quietly in theearth, while the larks sang high above it, and the light wind strewed it withbeautiful shadows of clouds and trees.
Of the conduct of the worldly minded Pumblechook while this was doing, I desireto say no more than it was all addressed to me; and that even when those noblepassages were read which remind humanity how it brought nothing into the worldand can take nothing out, and how it fleeth like a shadow and never continuethlong in one stay, I heard him cough a reservation of the case of a younggentleman who came unexpectedly into large property. When we got back, he hadthe hardihood to tell me that he wished my sister could have known I had doneher so much honour, and to hint that she would have considered it reasonablypurchased at the price of her death. After that, he drank all the rest of thesherry, and Mr. Hubble drank the port, and the two talked (which I have sinceobserved to be customary in such cases) as if they were of quite another racefrom the deceased, and were notoriously immortal. Finally, he went away withMr. and Mrs. Hubble,—to make an evening of it, I felt sure, and to tell theJolly Bargemen that he was the founder of my fortunes and my earliestbenefactor.
When they were all gone, and when Trabb and his men—but not his Boy; I lookedfor him—had crammed their mummery into bags, and were gone too, the house feltwholesomer. Soon afterwards, Biddy, Joe, and I, had a cold dinner together; butwe dined in the best parlour, not in the old kitchen, and Joe was soexceedingly particular what he did with his knife and fork and the saltcellarand what not, that there was great restraint upon us. But after dinner, when Imade him take his pipe, and when I had loitered with him about the forge, andwhen we sat down together on the great block of stone outside it, we got onbetter. I noticed that after the funeral Joe changed his clothes so far, as tomake a compromise between his Sunday dress and working dress; in which the dearfellow looked natural, and like the Man he was.
He was very much pleased by my asking if I might sleep in my own little room,and I was pleased too; for I felt that I had done rather a great thing inmaking the request. When the shadows of evening were closing in, I took anopportunity of getting into the garden with Biddy for a little talk.
"Biddy," said I, "I think you might have written to me about these sadmatters."
"Do you, Mr. Pip?" said Biddy. "I should have written if I had thought that."
"Don't suppose that I mean to be unkind, Biddy, when I say I consider that youought to have thought that."
"Do you, Mr. Pip?"
She was so quiet, and had such an orderly, good, and pretty way with her, thatI did not like the thought of making her cry again. After looking a little ather downcast eyes as she walked beside me, I gave up that point.
"I suppose it will be difficult for you to remain here now, Biddy dear?"
"Oh! I can't do so, Mr. Pip," said Biddy, in a tone of regret but still ofquiet conviction. "I have been speaking to Mrs. Hubble, and I am going to herto-morrow. I hope we shall be able to take some care of Mr. Gargery, together,until he settles down."
"How are you going to live, Biddy? If you want any mo—"
"How am I going to live?" repeated Biddy, striking in, with a momentary flushupon her face. "I'll tell you, Mr. Pip. I am going to try to get the place ofmistress in the new school nearly finished here. I can be well recommended byall the neighbours, and I hope I can be industrious and patient, and teachmyself while I teach others. You know, Mr. Pip," pursued Biddy, with a smile,as she raised her eyes to my face, "the new schools are not like the old, but Ilearnt a good deal from you after that time, and have had time since then toimprove."
"I think you would always improve, Biddy, under any circumstances."
"Ah! Except in my bad side of human nature," murmured Biddy.
It was not so much a reproach as an irresistible thinking aloud. Well! Ithought I would give up that point too. So, I walked a little further withBiddy, looking silently at her downcast eyes.
"I have not heard the particulars of my sister's death, Biddy."
"They are very slight, poor thing. She had been in one of her bad states—thoughthey had got better of late, rather than worse—for four days, when she came outof it in the evening, just at tea-time, and said quite plainly, ‘Joe.' As shehad never said any word for a long while, I ran and fetched in Mr. Gargery fromthe forge. She made signs to me that she wanted him to sit down close to her,and wanted me to put her arms round his neck. So I put them round his neck, andshe laid her head down on his shoulder quite content and satisfied. And so shepresently said ‘Joe' again, and once ‘Pardon,' and once ‘Pip.' And so she neverlifted her head up any more, and it was just an hour later when we laid it downon her own bed, because we found she was gone."
Biddy cried; the darkening garden, and the lane, and the stars that were comingout, were blurred in my own sight.
"Nothing was ever discovered, Biddy?"
"Nothing."
"Do you know what is become of Orlick?"
"I should think from the colour of his clothes that he is working in thequarries."
"Of course you have seen him then?—Why are you looking at that dark tree in thelane?"
"I saw him there, on the night she died."
"That was not the last time either, Biddy?"
"No; I have seen him there, since we have been walking here.—It is of no use,"said Biddy, laying her hand upon my arm, as I was for running out, "you know Iwould not deceive you; he was not there a minute, and he is gone."
It revived my utmost indignation to find that she was still pursued by thisfellow, and I felt inveterate against him. I told her so, and told her that Iwould spend any money or take any pains to drive him out of that country. Bydegrees she led me into more temperate talk, and she told me how Joe loved me,and how Joe never complained of anything,—she didn't say, of me; she had noneed; I knew what she meant,—but ever did his duty in his way of life, with astrong hand, a quiet tongue, and a gentle heart.
"Indeed, it would be hard to say too much for him," said I; "and Biddy, we mustoften speak of these things, for of course I shall be often down here now. I amnot going to leave poor Joe alone."
Biddy said never a single word.
"Biddy, don't you hear me?"
"Yes, Mr. Pip."
"Not to mention your calling me Mr. Pip,—which appears to me to be in badtaste, Biddy,—what do you mean?"
"What do I mean?" asked Biddy, timidly.
"Biddy," said I, in a virtuously self-asserting manner, "I must request to knowwhat you mean by this?"
"By this?" said Biddy.
"Now, don't echo," I retorted. "You used not to echo, Biddy."
"Used not!" said Biddy. "O Mr. Pip! Used!"
Well! I rather thought I would give up that point too. After another silentturn in the garden, I fell back on the main position.
"Biddy," said I, "I made a remark respecting my coming down here often, to seeJoe, which you received with a marked silence. Have the goodness, Biddy, totell me why."
"Are you quite sure, then, that you WILL come to see him often?"asked Biddy, stopping in the narrow garden walk, and looking at me under thestars with a clear and honest eye.
"O dear me!" said I, as if I found myself compelled to give up Biddy indespair. "This really is a very bad side of human nature! Don't say any more,if you please, Biddy. This shocks me very much."
For which cogent reason I kept Biddy at a distance during supper, and when Iwent up to my own old little room, took as stately a leave of her as I could,in my murmuring soul, deem reconcilable with the churchyard and the event ofthe day. As often as I was restless in the night, and that was every quarter ofan hour, I reflected what an unkindness, what an injury, what an injustice,Biddy had done me.
Early in the morning I was to go. Early in the morning I was out, and lookingin, unseen, at one of the wooden windows of the forge. There I stood, forminutes, looking at Joe, already at work with a glow of health and strengthupon his face that made it show as if the bright sun of the life in store forhim were shining on it.
"Good-bye, dear Joe!—No, don't wipe it off—for God's sake, give me yourblackened hand!—I shall be down soon and often."




"Never too soon, sir," said Joe, "and never too often, Pip!"
Biddy was waiting for me at the kitchen door, with a mug of new milk and acrust of bread. "Biddy," said I, when I gave her my hand at parting, "I am notangry, but I am hurt."
"No, don't be hurt," she pleaded quite pathetically; "let only me be hurt, if Ihave been ungenerous."
Once more, the mists were rising as I walked away. If they disclosed to me, asI suspect they did, that I should not come back, and that Biddy wasquite right, all I can say is,—they were quite right too.
