
Chapter XXXVI.
Herbert and I went on from bad to worse, in the way ofincreasing our debts, looking into our affairs, leaving Margins, and the likeexemplary transactions; and Time went on, whether or no, as he has a way ofdoing; and I came of age,—in fulfilment of Herbert's prediction, that I shoulddo so before I knew where I was.
Herbert himself had come of age eight months before me. As he had nothing elsethan his majority to come into, the event did not make a profound sensation inBarnard's Inn. But we had looked forward to my one-and-twentieth birthday, witha crowd of speculations and anticipations, for we had both considered that myguardian could hardly help saying something definite on that occasion.
I had taken care to have it well understood in Little Britain when my birthdaywas. On the day before it, I received an official note from Wemmick, informingme that Mr. Jaggers would be glad if I would call upon him at five in theafternoon of the auspicious day. This convinced us that something great was tohappen, and threw me into an unusual flutter when I repaired to my guardian'soffice, a model of punctuality.
In the outer office Wemmick offered me his congratulations, and incidentallyrubbed the side of his nose with a folded piece of tissue-paper that I likedthe look of. But he said nothing respecting it, and motioned me with a nod intomy guardian's room. It was November, and my guardian was standing before hisfire leaning his back against the chimney-piece, with his hands under hiscoattails.
"Well, Pip," said he, "I must call you Mr. Pip to-day. Congratulations, Mr.Pip."
We shook hands,—he was always a remarkably short shaker,—and I thanked him.
"Take a chair, Mr. Pip," said my guardian.
As I sat down, and he preserved his attitude and bent his brows at his boots, Ifelt at a disadvantage, which reminded me of that old time when I had been putupon a tombstone. The two ghastly casts on the shelf were not far from him, andtheir expression was as if they were making a stupid apoplectic attempt toattend to the conversation.
"Now my young friend," my guardian began, as if I were a witness in the box, "Iam going to have a word or two with you."
"If you please, sir."
"What do you suppose," said Mr. Jaggers, bending forward to look at the ground,and then throwing his head back to look at the ceiling,—"what do you supposeyou are living at the rate of?"
"At the rate of, sir?"
"At," repeated Mr. Jaggers, still looking at the ceiling, "the—rate—of?" Andthen looked all round the room, and paused with his pocket-handkerchief in hishand, half-way to his nose.
I had looked into my affairs so often, that I had thoroughly destroyed anyslight notion I might ever have had of their bearings. Reluctantly, I confessedmyself quite unable to answer the question. This reply seemed agreeable to Mr.Jaggers, who said, "I thought so!" and blew his nose with an air ofsatisfaction.
"Now, I have asked you a question, my friend," said Mr. Jaggers. "Haveyou anything to ask me?"
"Of course it would be a great relief to me to ask you several questions, sir;but I remember your prohibition."
"Ask one," said Mr. Jaggers.
"Is my benefactor to be made known to me to-day?"
"No. Ask another."
"Is that confidence to be imparted to me soon?"
"Waive that, a moment," said Mr. Jaggers, "and ask another."
I looked about me, but there appeared to be now no possible escape from theinquiry, "Have-I—anything to receive, sir?" On that, Mr. Jaggers said,triumphantly, "I thought we should come to it!" and called to Wemmick to givehim that piece of paper. Wemmick appeared, handed it in, and disappeared.
"Now, Mr. Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, "attend, if you please. You have been drawingpretty freely here; your name occurs pretty often in Wemmick's cash-book; butyou are in debt, of course?"
"I am afraid I must say yes, sir."
"You know you must say yes; don't you?" said Mr. Jaggers.
"Yes, sir."
"I don't ask you what you owe, because you don't know; and if you did know, youwouldn't tell me; you would say less. Yes, yes, my friend," cried Mr. Jaggers,waving his forefinger to stop me as I made a show of protesting: "it's likelyenough that you think you wouldn't, but you would. You'll excuse me, but I knowbetter than you. Now, take this piece of paper in your hand. You have got it?Very good. Now, unfold it and tell me what it is."
"This is a bank-note," said I, "for five hundred pounds."
"That is a bank-note," repeated Mr. Jaggers, "for five hundred pounds. And avery handsome sum of money too, I think. You consider it so?"
"How could I do otherwise!"
"Ah! But answer the question," said Mr. Jaggers.
"Undoubtedly."
"You consider it, undoubtedly, a handsome sum of money. Now, that handsome sumof money, Pip, is your own. It is a present to you on this day, in earnest ofyour expectations. And at the rate of that handsome sum of money per annum, andat no higher rate, you are to live until the donor of the whole appears. Thatis to say, you will now take your money affairs entirely into your own hands,and you will draw from Wemmick one hundred and twenty-five pounds per quarter,until you are in communication with the fountain-head, and no longer with themere agent. As I have told you before, I am the mere agent. I execute myinstructions, and I am paid for doing so. I think them injudicious, but I amnot paid for giving any opinion on their merits."
I was beginning to express my gratitude to my benefactor for the greatliberality with which I was treated, when Mr. Jaggers stopped me. "I am notpaid, Pip," said he, coolly, "to carry your words to any one;" and thengathered up his coat-tails, as he had gathered up the subject, and stoodfrowning at his boots as if he suspected them of designs against him.
After a pause, I hinted,—
"There was a question just now, Mr. Jaggers, which you desired me to waive fora moment. I hope I am doing nothing wrong in asking it again?"
"What is it?" said he.
I might have known that he would never help me out; but it took me aback tohave to shape the question afresh, as if it were quite new. "Is it likely," Isaid, after hesitating, "that my patron, the fountain-head you have spoken of,Mr. Jaggers, will soon—" there I delicately stopped.
"Will soon what?" asked Mr. Jaggers. "That's no question as it stands, youknow."
"Will soon come to London," said I, after casting about for a precise form ofwords, "or summon me anywhere else?"
"Now, here," replied Mr. Jaggers, fixing me for the first time with his darkdeep-set eyes, "we must revert to the evening when we first encountered oneanother in your village. What did I tell you then, Pip?"
"You told me, Mr. Jaggers, that it might be years hence when that personappeared."
"Just so," said Mr. Jaggers, "that's my answer."
As we looked full at one another, I felt my breath come quicker in my strongdesire to get something out of him. And as I felt that it came quicker, and asI felt that he saw that it came quicker, I felt that I had less chance thanever of getting anything out of him.
"Do you suppose it will still be years hence, Mr. Jaggers?"
Mr. Jaggers shook his head,—not in negativing the question, but in altogethernegativing the notion that he could anyhow be got to answer it,—and the twohorrible casts of the twitched faces looked, when my eyes strayed up to them,as if they had come to a crisis in their suspended attention, and were going tosneeze.
"Come!" said Mr. Jaggers, warming the backs of his legs with the backs of hiswarmed hands, "I'll be plain with you, my friend Pip. That's a question I mustnot be asked. You'll understand that better, when I tell you it's a questionthat might compromise me. Come! I'll go a little further with you; I'llsay something more."
He bent down so low to frown at his boots, that he was able to rub the calvesof his legs in the pause he made.
"When that person discloses," said Mr. Jaggers, straightening himself, "you andthat person will settle your own affairs. When that person discloses, my partin this business will cease and determine. When that person discloses, it willnot be necessary for me to know anything about it. And that's all I have got tosay."
We looked at one another until I withdrew my eyes, and looked thoughtfully atthe floor. From this last speech I derived the notion that Miss Havisham, forsome reason or no reason, had not taken him into her confidence as to herdesigning me for Estella; that he resented this, and felt a jealousy about it;or that he really did object to that scheme, and would have nothing to do withit. When I raised my eyes again, I found that he had been shrewdly looking atme all the time, and was doing so still.
"If that is all you have to say, sir," I remarked, "there can be nothing leftfor me to say."
He nodded assent, and pulled out his thief-dreaded watch, and asked me where Iwas going to dine? I replied at my own chambers, with Herbert. As a necessarysequence, I asked him if he would favour us with his company, and he promptlyaccepted the invitation. But he insisted on walking home with me, in order thatI might make no extra preparation for him, and first he had a letter or two towrite, and (of course) had his hands to wash. So I said I would go into theouter office and talk to Wemmick.
The fact was, that when the five hundred pounds had come into my pocket, athought had come into my head which had been often there before; and itappeared to me that Wemmick was a good person to advise with concerning suchthought.
He had already locked up his safe, and made preparations for going home. He hadleft his desk, brought out his two greasy office candlesticks and stood them inline with the snuffers on a slab near the door, ready to be extinguished; hehad raked his fire low, put his hat and great-coat ready, and was beatinghimself all over the chest with his safe-key, as an athletic exercise afterbusiness.
"Mr. Wemmick," said I, "I want to ask your opinion. I am very desirous to servea friend."
Wemmick tightened his post-office and shook his head, as if his opinion weredead against any fatal weakness of that sort.
"This friend," I pursued, "is trying to get on in commercial life, but has nomoney, and finds it difficult and disheartening to make a beginning. Now I wantsomehow to help him to a beginning."
"With money down?" said Wemmick, in a tone drier than any sawdust.
"With some money down," I replied, for an uneasy remembrance shot acrossme of that symmetrical bundle of papers at home—"with some money down,and perhaps some anticipation of my expectations."
"Mr. Pip," said Wemmick, "I should like just to run over with you on myfingers, if you please, the names of the various bridges up as high as ChelseaReach. Let's see; there's London, one; Southwark, two; Blackfriars, three;Waterloo, four; Westminster, five; Vauxhall, six." He had checked off eachbridge in its turn, with the handle of his safe-key on the palm of his hand."There's as many as six, you see, to choose from."
"I don't understand you," said I.
"Choose your bridge, Mr. Pip," returned Wemmick, "and take a walk upon yourbridge, and pitch your money into the Thames over the centre arch of yourbridge, and you know the end of it. Serve a friend with it, and you may knowthe end of it too,—but it's a less pleasant and profitable end."
I could have posted a newspaper in his mouth, he made it so wide after sayingthis.
"This is very discouraging," said I.
"Meant to be so," said Wemmick.
"Then is it your opinion," I inquired, with some little indignation, "that aman should never—"
"—Invest portable property in a friend?" said Wemmick. "Certainly he shouldnot. Unless he wants to get rid of the friend,—and then it becomes a questionhow much portable property it may be worth to get rid of him."
"And that," said I, "is your deliberate opinion, Mr. Wemmick?"
"That," he returned, "is my deliberate opinion in this office."
"Ah!" said I, pressing him, for I thought I saw him near a loophole here; "butwould that be your opinion at Walworth?"
"Mr. Pip," he replied, with gravity, "Walworth is one place, and this office isanother. Much as the Aged is one person, and Mr. Jaggers is another. They mustnot be confounded together. My Walworth sentiments must be taken at Walworth;none but my official sentiments can be taken in this office."
"Very well," said I, much relieved, "then I shall look you up at Walworth, youmay depend upon it."
"Mr. Pip," he returned, "you will be welcome there, in a private and personalcapacity."
We had held this conversation in a low voice, well knowing my guardian's earsto be the sharpest of the sharp. As he now appeared in his doorway, towellinghis hands, Wemmick got on his great-coat and stood by to snuff out the candles.We all three went into the street together, and from the door-step Wemmickturned his way, and Mr. Jaggers and I turned ours.
I could not help wishing more than once that evening, that Mr. Jaggers had hadan Aged in Gerrard Street, or a Stinger, or a Something, or a Somebody, tounbend his brows a little. It was an uncomfortable consideration on atwenty-first birthday, that coming of age at all seemed hardly worth while insuch a guarded and suspicious world as he made of it. He was a thousand timesbetter informed and cleverer than Wemmick, and yet I would a thousand timesrather have had Wemmick to dinner. And Mr. Jaggers made not me alone intenselymelancholy, because, after he was gone, Herbert said of himself, with his eyesfixed on the fire, that he thought he must have committed a felony andforgotten the details of it, he felt so dejected and guilty.
