
Chapter XXXVII.
Deeming Sunday the best day for taking Mr. Wemmick's Walworthsentiments, I devoted the next ensuing Sunday afternoon to a pilgrimage to theCastle. On arriving before the battlements, I found the Union Jack flying andthe drawbridge up; but undeterred by this show of defiance and resistance, Irang at the gate, and was admitted in a most pacific manner by the Aged.
"My son, sir," said the old man, after securing the drawbridge, "rather had itin his mind that you might happen to drop in, and he left word that he wouldsoon be home from his afternoon's walk. He is very regular in his walks, is myson. Very regular in everything, is my son."
I nodded at the old gentleman as Wemmick himself might have nodded, and we wentin and sat down by the fireside.
"You made acquaintance with my son, sir," said the old man, in his chirpingway, while he warmed his hands at the blaze, "at his office, I expect?" Inodded. "Hah! I have heerd that my son is a wonderful hand at his business,sir?" I nodded hard. "Yes; so they tell me. His business is the Law?" I noddedharder. "Which makes it more surprising in my son," said the old man, "for hewas not brought up to the Law, but to the Wine-Coopering."
Curious to know how the old gentleman stood informed concerning the reputationof Mr. Jaggers, I roared that name at him. He threw me into the greatestconfusion by laughing heartily and replying in a very sprightly manner, "No, tobe sure; you're right." And to this hour I have not the faintest notion what hemeant, or what joke he thought I had made.
As I could not sit there nodding at him perpetually, without making some otherattempt to interest him, I shouted at inquiry whether his own calling in lifehad been "the Wine-Coopering." By dint of straining that term out of myselfseveral times and tapping the old gentleman on the chest to associate it withhim, I at last succeeded in making my meaning understood.
"No," said the old gentleman; "the warehousing, the warehousing. First, overyonder;" he appeared to mean up the chimney, but I believe he intended to referme to Liverpool; "and then in the City of London here. However, having aninfirmity—for I am hard of hearing, sir—"
I expressed in pantomime the greatest astonishment.
"—Yes, hard of hearing; having that infirmity coming upon me, my son he wentinto the Law, and he took charge of me, and he by little and little made outthis elegant and beautiful property. But returning to what you said, you know,"pursued the old man, again laughing heartily, "what I say is, No to be sure;you're right."
I was modestly wondering whether my utmost ingenuity would have enabled me tosay anything that would have amused him half as much as this imaginarypleasantry, when I was startled by a sudden click in the wall on one side ofthe chimney, and the ghostly tumbling open of a little wooden flap with"JOHN" upon it. The old man, following my eyes, cried with greattriumph, "My son's come home!" and we both went out to the drawbridge.
It was worth any money to see Wemmick waving a salute to me from the other sideof the moat, when we might have shaken hands across it with the greatest ease.The Aged was so delighted to work the drawbridge, that I made no offer toassist him, but stood quiet until Wemmick had come across, and had presented meto Miss Skiffins; a lady by whom he was accompanied.
Miss Skiffins was of a wooden appearance, and was, like her escort, in thepost-office branch of the service. She might have been some two or three yearsyounger than Wemmick, and I judged her to stand possessed of portable property.The cut of her dress from the waist upward, both before and behind, made herfigure very like a boy's kite; and I might have pronounced her gown a littletoo decidedly orange, and her gloves a little too intensely green. But sheseemed to be a good sort of fellow, and showed a high regard for the Aged. Iwas not long in discovering that she was a frequent visitor at the Castle; for,on our going in, and my complimenting Wemmick on his ingenious contrivance forannouncing himself to the Aged, he begged me to give my attention for a momentto the other side of the chimney, and disappeared. Presently another clickcame, and another little door tumbled open with "Miss Skiffins" on it; thenMiss Skiffins shut up and John tumbled open; then Miss Skiffins and John bothtumbled open together, and finally shut up together. On Wemmick's return fromworking these mechanical appliances, I expressed the great admiration withwhich I regarded them, and he said, "Well, you know, they're both pleasant anduseful to the Aged. And by George, sir, it's a thing worth mentioning, that ofall the people who come to this gate, the secret of those pulls is only knownto the Aged, Miss Skiffins, and me!"
"And Mr. Wemmick made them," added Miss Skiffins, "with his own hands out ofhis own head."
While Miss Skiffins was taking off her bonnet (she retained her green glovesduring the evening as an outward and visible sign that there was company),Wemmick invited me to take a walk with him round the property, and see how theisland looked in wintertime. Thinking that he did this to give me anopportunity of taking his Walworth sentiments, I seized the opportunity as soonas we were out of the Castle.
Having thought of the matter with care, I approached my subject as if I hadnever hinted at it before. I informed Wemmick that I was anxious in behalf ofHerbert Pocket, and I told him how we had first met, and how we had fought. Iglanced at Herbert's home, and at his character, and at his having no means butsuch as he was dependent on his father for; those, uncertain and unpunctual. Ialluded to the advantages I had derived in my first rawness and ignorance fromhis society, and I confessed that I feared I had but ill repaid them, and thathe might have done better without me and my expectations. Keeping Miss Havishamin the background at a great distance, I still hinted at the possibility of myhaving competed with him in his prospects, and at the certainty of hispossessing a generous soul, and being far above any mean distrusts,retaliations, or designs. For all these reasons (I told Wemmick), and becausehe was my young companion and friend, and I had a great affection for him, Iwished my own good fortune to reflect some rays upon him, and therefore Isought advice from Wemmick's experience and knowledge of men and affairs, how Icould best try with my resources to help Herbert to some present income,—say ofa hundred a year, to keep him in good hope and heart,—and gradually to buy himon to some small partnership. I begged Wemmick, in conclusion, to understandthat my help must always be rendered without Herbert's knowledge or suspicion,and that there was no one else in the world with whom I could advise. I woundup by laying my hand upon his shoulder, and saying, "I can't help confiding inyou, though I know it must be troublesome to you; but that is your fault, inhaving ever brought me here."
Wemmick was silent for a little while, and then said with a kind of start,"Well you know, Mr. Pip, I must tell you one thing. This is devilish good ofyou."
"Say you'll help me to be good then," said I.
"Ecod," replied Wemmick, shaking his head, "that's not my trade."
"Nor is this your trading-place," said I.
"You are right," he returned. "You hit the nail on the head. Mr. Pip, I'll puton my considering-cap, and I think all you want to do may be done by degrees.Skiffins (that's her brother) is an accountant and agent. I'll look him up andgo to work for you."
"I thank you ten thousand times."
"On the contrary," said he, "I thank you, for though we are strictly in ourprivate and personal capacity, still it may be mentioned that there areNewgate cobwebs about, and it brushes them away."
After a little further conversation to the same effect, we returned into theCastle where we found Miss Skiffins preparing tea. The responsible duty ofmaking the toast was delegated to the Aged, and that excellent old gentlemanwas so intent upon it that he seemed to me in some danger of melting his eyes.It was no nominal meal that we were going to make, but a vigorous reality. TheAged prepared such a hay-stack of buttered toast, that I could scarcely see himover it as it simmered on an iron stand hooked on to the top-bar; while MissSkiffins brewed such a jorum of tea, that the pig in the back premises becamestrongly excited, and repeatedly expressed his desire to participate in theentertainment.
The flag had been struck, and the gun had been fired, at the right moment oftime, and I felt as snugly cut off from the rest of Walworth as if the moatwere thirty feet wide by as many deep. Nothing disturbed the tranquillity ofthe Castle, but the occasional tumbling open of John and Miss Skiffins: whichlittle doors were a prey to some spasmodic infirmity that made mesympathetically uncomfortable until I got used to it. I inferred from themethodical nature of Miss Skiffins's arrangements that she made tea there everySunday night; and I rather suspected that a classic brooch she wore,representing the profile of an undesirable female with a very straight nose anda very new moon, was a piece of portable property that had been given her byWemmick.
We ate the whole of the toast, and drank tea in proportion, and it wasdelightful to see how warm and greasy we all got after it. The Aged especially,might have passed for some clean old chief of a savage tribe, just oiled. Aftera short pause of repose, Miss Skiffins—in the absence of the little servantwho, it seemed, retired to the bosom of her family on Sunday afternoons—washedup the tea-things, in a trifling lady-like amateur manner that compromised noneof us. Then, she put on her gloves again, and we drew round the fire, andWemmick said, "Now, Aged Parent, tip us the paper."
Wemmick explained to me while the Aged got his spectacles out, that this wasaccording to custom, and that it gave the old gentleman infinite satisfactionto read the news aloud. "I won't offer an apology," said Wemmick, "for he isn'tcapable of many pleasures—are you, Aged P.?"
"All right, John, all right," returned the old man, seeing himself spoken to.
"Only tip him a nod every now and then when he looks off his paper," saidWemmick, "and he'll be as happy as a king. We are all attention, Aged One."
"All right, John, all right!" returned the cheerful old man, so busy and sopleased, that it really was quite charming.
The Aged's reading reminded me of the classes at Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt's,with the pleasanter peculiarity that it seemed to come through a keyhole. As hewanted the candles close to him, and as he was always on the verge of puttingeither his head or the newspaper into them, he required as much watching as apowder-mill. But Wemmick was equally untiring and gentle in his vigilance, andthe Aged read on, quite unconscious of his many rescues. Whenever he looked atus, we all expressed the greatest interest and amazement, and nodded until heresumed again.
As Wemmick and Miss Skiffins sat side by side, and as I sat in a shadowycorner, I observed a slow and gradual elongation of Mr. Wemmick's mouth,powerfully suggestive of his slowly and gradually stealing his arm round MissSkiffins's waist. In course of time I saw his hand appear on the other side ofMiss Skiffins; but at that moment Miss Skiffins neatly stopped him with thegreen glove, unwound his arm again as if it were an article of dress, and withthe greatest deliberation laid it on the table before her. Miss Skiffins'scomposure while she did this was one of the most remarkable sights I have everseen, and if I could have thought the act consistent with abstraction of mind,I should have deemed that Miss Skiffins performed it mechanically.
By and by, I noticed Wemmick's arm beginning to disappear again, and graduallyfading out of view. Shortly afterwards, his mouth began to widen again. Afteran interval of suspense on my part that was quite enthralling and almostpainful, I saw his hand appear on the other side of Miss Skiffins. Instantly,Miss Skiffins stopped it with the neatness of a placid boxer, took off thatgirdle or cestus as before, and laid it on the table. Taking the table torepresent the path of virtue, I am justified in stating that during the wholetime of the Aged's reading, Wemmick's arm was straying from the path of virtueand being recalled to it by Miss Skiffins.
At last, the Aged read himself into a light slumber. This was the time forWemmick to produce a little kettle, a tray of glasses, and a black bottle witha porcelain-topped cork, representing some clerical dignitary of a rubicund andsocial aspect. With the aid of these appliances we all had something warm todrink, including the Aged, who was soon awake again. Miss Skiffins mixed, and Iobserved that she and Wemmick drank out of one glass. Of course I knew betterthan to offer to see Miss Skiffins home, and under the circumstances I thoughtI had best go first; which I did, taking a cordial leave of the Aged, andhaving passed a pleasant evening.
Before a week was out, I received a note from Wemmick, dated Walworth, statingthat he hoped he had made some advance in that matter appertaining to ourprivate and personal capacities, and that he would be glad if I could come andsee him again upon it. So, I went out to Walworth again, and yet again, and yetagain, and I saw him by appointment in the City several times, but never heldany communication with him on the subject in or near Little Britain. The upshotwas, that we found a worthy young merchant or shipping-broker, not longestablished in business, who wanted intelligent help, and who wanted capital,and who in due course of time and receipt would want a partner. Between him andme, secret articles were signed of which Herbert was the subject, and I paidhim half of my five hundred pounds down, and engaged for sundry other payments:some, to fall due at certain dates out of my income: some, contingent on mycoming into my property. Miss Skiffins's brother conducted the negotiation.Wemmick pervaded it throughout, but never appeared in it.
The whole business was so cleverly managed, that Herbert had not the leastsuspicion of my hand being in it. I never shall forget the radiant face withwhich he came home one afternoon, and told me, as a mighty piece of news, ofhis having fallen in with one Clarriker (the young merchant's name), and ofClarriker's having shown an extraordinary inclination towards him, and of hisbelief that the opening had come at last. Day by day as his hopes grew strongerand his face brighter, he must have thought me a more and more affectionatefriend, for I had the greatest difficulty in restraining my tears of triumphwhen I saw him so happy. At length, the thing being done, and he having thatday entered Clarriker's House, and he having talked to me for a whole eveningin a flush of pleasure and success, I did really cry in good earnest when Iwent to bed, to think that my expectations had done some good to somebody.
A great event in my life, the turning point of my life, now opens on my view.But, before I proceed to narrate it, and before I pass on to all the changes itinvolved, I must give one chapter to Estella. It is not much to give to thetheme that so long filled my heart.
