
Chapter XXXVIII.
Ifthat staid old house near the Green at Richmond should ever come to be hauntedwhen I am dead, it will be haunted, surely, by my ghost. O the many, manynights and days through which the unquiet spirit within me haunted that housewhen Estella lived there! Let my body be where it would, my spirit was alwayswandering, wandering, wandering, about that house.
The lady with whom Estella was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name, was a widow, withone daughter several years older than Estella. The mother looked young, and thedaughter looked old; the mother's complexion was pink, and the daughter's wasyellow; the mother set up for frivolity, and the daughter for theology. Theywere in what is called a good position, and visited, and were visited by,numbers of people. Little, if any, community of feeling subsisted between themand Estella, but the understanding was established that they were necessary toher, and that she was necessary to them. Mrs. Brandley had been a friend ofMiss Havisham's before the time of her seclusion.
In Mrs. Brandley's house and out of Mrs. Brandley's house, I suffered everykind and degree of torture that Estella could cause me. The nature of myrelations with her, which placed me on terms of familiarity without placing meon terms of favour, conduced to my distraction. She made use of me to teaseother admirers, and she turned the very familiarity between herself and me tothe account of putting a constant slight on my devotion to her. If I had beenher secretary, steward, half-brother, poor relation,—if I had been a youngerbrother of her appointed husband,—I could not have seemed to myself furtherfrom my hopes when I was nearest to her. The privilege of calling her by hername and hearing her call me by mine became, under the circumstances anaggravation of my trials; and while I think it likely that it almost maddenedher other lovers, I know too certainly that it almost maddened me.
She had admirers without end. No doubt my jealousy made an admirer of every onewho went near her; but there were more than enough of them without that.
I saw her often at Richmond, I heard of her often in town, and I used often totake her and the Brandleys on the water; there were picnics, fête days, plays,operas, concerts, parties, all sorts of pleasures, through which I pursuedher,—and they were all miseries to me. I never had one hour's happiness in hersociety, and yet my mind all round the four-and-twenty hours was harping on thehappiness of having her with me unto death.
Throughout this part of our intercourse,—and it lasted, as will presently beseen, for what I then thought a long time,—she habitually reverted to that tonewhich expressed that our association was forced upon us. There were other timeswhen she would come to a sudden check in this tone and in all her many tones,and would seem to pity me.
"Pip, Pip," she said one evening, coming to such a check, when we sat apart ata darkening window of the house in Richmond; "will you never take warning?"
"Of what?"
"Of me."
"Warning not to be attracted by you, do you mean, Estella?"
"Do I mean! If you don't know what I mean, you are blind."
I should have replied that Love was commonly reputed blind, but for the reasonthat I always was restrained—and this was not the least of my miseries—by afeeling that it was ungenerous to press myself upon her, when she knew that shecould not choose but obey Miss Havisham. My dread always was, that thisknowledge on her part laid me under a heavy disadvantage with her pride, andmade me the subject of a rebellious struggle in her bosom.
"At any rate," said I, "I have no warning given me just now, for you wrote tome to come to you, this time."
"That's true," said Estella, with a cold careless smile that always chilled me.
After looking at the twilight without, for a little while, she went on to say:—
"The time has come round when Miss Havisham wishes to have me for a day atSatis. You are to take me there, and bring me back, if you will. She wouldrather I did not travel alone, and objects to receiving my maid, for she has asensitive horror of being talked of by such people. Can you take me?"
"Can I take you, Estella!"
"You can then? The day after to-morrow, if you please. You are to pay allcharges out of my purse. You hear the condition of your going?"
"And must obey," said I.
This was all the preparation I received for that visit, or for others like it;Miss Havisham never wrote to me, nor had I ever so much as seen herhandwriting. We went down on the next day but one, and we found her in the roomwhere I had first beheld her, and it is needless to add that there was nochange in Satis House.
She was even more dreadfully fond of Estella than she had been when I last sawthem together; I repeat the word advisedly, for there was something positivelydreadful in the energy of her looks and embraces. She hung upon Estella'sbeauty, hung upon her words, hung upon her gestures, and sat mumbling her owntrembling fingers while she looked at her, as though she were devouring thebeautiful creature she had reared.
From Estella she looked at me, with a searching glance that seemed to pry intomy heart and probe its wounds. "How does she use you, Pip; how does she useyou?" she asked me again, with her witch-like eagerness, even in Estella'shearing. But, when we sat by her flickering fire at night, she was most weird;for then, keeping Estella's hand drawn through her arm and clutched in her ownhand, she extorted from her, by dint of referring back to what Estella had toldher in her regular letters, the names and conditions of the men whom she hadfascinated; and as Miss Havisham dwelt upon this roll, with the intensity of amind mortally hurt and diseased, she sat with her other hand on her crutchstick, and her chin on that, and her wan bright eyes glaring at me, a veryspectre.
I saw in this, wretched though it made me, and bitter the sense of dependenceand even of degradation that it awakened,—I saw in this that Estella was set towreak Miss Havisham's revenge on men, and that she was not to be given to meuntil she had gratified it for a term. I saw in this, a reason for her beingbeforehand assigned to me. Sending her out to attract and torment and domischief, Miss Havisham sent her with the malicious assurance that she wasbeyond the reach of all admirers, and that all who staked upon that cast weresecured to lose. I saw in this that I, too, was tormented by a perversion ofingenuity, even while the prize was reserved for me. I saw in this the reasonfor my being staved off so long and the reason for my late guardian's decliningto commit himself to the formal knowledge of such a scheme. In a word, I saw inthis Miss Havisham as I had her then and there before my eyes, and always hadhad her before my eyes; and I saw in this, the distinct shadow of the darkenedand unhealthy house in which her life was hidden from the sun.
The candles that lighted that room of hers were placed in sconces on the wall.They were high from the ground, and they burnt with the steady dulness ofartificial light in air that is seldom renewed. As I looked round at them, andat the pale gloom they made, and at the stopped clock, and at the witheredarticles of bridal dress upon the table and the ground, and at her own awfulfigure with its ghostly reflection thrown large by the fire upon the ceilingand the wall, I saw in everything the construction that my mind had come to,repeated and thrown back to me. My thoughts passed into the great room acrossthe landing where the table was spread, and I saw it written, as it were, inthe falls of the cobwebs from the centre-piece, in the crawlings of the spiderson the cloth, in the tracks of the mice as they betook their little quickenedhearts behind the panels, and in the gropings and pausings of the beetles onthe floor.
It happened on the occasion of this visit that some sharp words arose betweenEstella and Miss Havisham. It was the first time I had ever seen them opposed.
We were seated by the fire, as just now described, and Miss Havisham still hadEstella's arm drawn through her own, and still clutched Estella's hand in hers,when Estella gradually began to detach herself. She had shown a proudimpatience more than once before, and had rather endured that fierce affectionthan accepted or returned it.
"What!" said Miss Havisham, flashing her eyes upon her, "are you tired of me?"
"Only a little tired of myself," replied Estella, disengaging her arm, andmoving to the great chimney-piece, where she stood looking down at the fire.
"Speak the truth, you ingrate!" cried Miss Havisham, passionately striking herstick upon the floor; "you are tired of me."
Estella looked at her with perfect composure, and again looked down at thefire. Her graceful figure and her beautiful face expressed a self-possessedindifference to the wild heat of the other, that was almost cruel.
"You stock and stone!" exclaimed Miss Havisham. "You cold, cold heart!"
"What?" said Estella, preserving her attitude of indifference as she leanedagainst the great chimney-piece and only moving her eyes; "do you reproach mefor being cold? You?"
"Are you not?" was the fierce retort.
"You should know," said Estella. "I am what you have made me. Take all thepraise, take all the blame; take all the success, take all the failure; inshort, take me."
"O, look at her, look at her!" cried Miss Havisham, bitterly; "Look at her sohard and thankless, on the hearth where she was reared! Where I took her intothis wretched breast when it was first bleeding from its stabs, and where Ihave lavished years of tenderness upon her!"




"At least I was no party to the compact," said Estella, "for if I could walkand speak, when it was made, it was as much as I could do. But what would youhave? You have been very good to me, and I owe everything to you. What wouldyou have?"
"Love," replied the other.
"You have it."
"I have not," said Miss Havisham.
"Mother by adoption," retorted Estella, never departing from the easy grace ofher attitude, never raising her voice as the other did, never yielding eitherto anger or tenderness,—"mother by adoption, I have said that I owe everythingto you. All I possess is freely yours. All that you have given me, is at yourcommand to have again. Beyond that, I have nothing. And if you ask me to giveyou, what you never gave me, my gratitude and duty cannot do impossibilities."
"Did I never give her love!" cried Miss Havisham, turning wildly to me. "Did Inever give her a burning love, inseparable from jealousy at all times, and fromsharp pain, while she speaks thus to me! Let her call me mad, let her call memad!"
"Why should I call you mad," returned Estella, "I, of all people? Does any onelive, who knows what set purposes you have, half as well as I do? Does any onelive, who knows what a steady memory you have, half as well as I do? I who havesat on this same hearth on the little stool that is even now beside you there,learning your lessons and looking up into your face, when your face was strangeand frightened me!"
"Soon forgotten!" moaned Miss Havisham. "Times soon forgotten!"
"No, not forgotten," retorted Estella,—"not forgotten, but treasured up in mymemory. When have you found me false to your teaching? When have you found meunmindful of your lessons? When have you found me giving admission here," shetouched her bosom with her hand, "to anything that you excluded? Be just tome."
"So proud, so proud!" moaned Miss Havisham, pushing away her grey hair withboth her hands.
"Who taught me to be proud?" returned Estella. "Who praised me when I learnt mylesson?"
"So hard, so hard!" moaned Miss Havisham, with her former action.
"Who taught me to be hard?" returned Estella. "Who praised me when I learnt mylesson?"
"But to be proud and hard to me!" Miss Havisham quite shrieked, as shestretched out her arms. "Estella, Estella, Estella, to be proud and hard tome!"
Estella looked at her for a moment with a kind of calm wonder, but was nototherwise disturbed; when the moment was past, she looked down at the fireagain.
"I cannot think," said Estella, raising her eyes after a silence "why youshould be so unreasonable when I come to see you after a separation. I havenever forgotten your wrongs and their causes. I have never been unfaithful toyou or your schooling. I have never shown any weakness that I can charge myselfwith."
"Would it be weakness to return my love?" exclaimed Miss Havisham. "But yes,yes, she would call it so!"
"I begin to think," said Estella, in a musing way, after another moment of calmwonder, "that I almost understand how this comes about. If you had brought upyour adopted daughter wholly in the dark confinement of these rooms, and hadnever let her know that there was such a thing as the daylight by which she hadnever once seen your face,—if you had done that, and then, for a purpose hadwanted her to understand the daylight and know all about it, you would havebeen disappointed and angry?"
Miss Havisham, with her head in her hands, sat making a low moaning, andswaying herself on her chair, but gave no answer.
"Or," said Estella,—"which is a nearer case,—if you had taught her, from thedawn of her intelligence, with your utmost energy and might, that there wassuch a thing as daylight, but that it was made to be her enemy and destroyer,and she must always turn against it, for it had blighted you and would elseblight her;—if you had done this, and then, for a purpose, had wanted her totake naturally to the daylight and she could not do it, you would have beendisappointed and angry?"
Miss Havisham sat listening (or it seemed so, for I could not see her face),but still made no answer.
"So," said Estella, "I must be taken as I have been made. The success is notmine, the failure is not mine, but the two together make me."
Miss Havisham had settled down, I hardly knew how, upon the floor, among thefaded bridal relics with which it was strewn. I took advantage of the moment—Ihad sought one from the first—to leave the room, after beseeching Estella'sattention to her, with a movement of my hand. When I left, Estella was yetstanding by the great chimney-piece, just as she had stood throughout. MissHavisham's grey hair was all adrift upon the ground, among the other bridalwrecks, and was a miserable sight to see.
It was with a depressed heart that I walked in the starlight for an hour andmore, about the courtyard, and about the brewery, and about the ruined garden.When I at last took courage to return to the room, I found Estella sitting atMiss Havisham's knee, taking up some stitches in one of those old articles ofdress that were dropping to pieces, and of which I have often been remindedsince by the faded tatters of old banners that I have seen hanging up incathedrals. Afterwards, Estella and I played at cards, as of yore,—only we wereskilful now, and played French games,—and so the evening wore away, and I wentto bed.
I lay in that separate building across the courtyard. It was the first time Ihad ever lain down to rest in Satis House, and sleep refused to come near me. Athousand Miss Havishams haunted me. She was on this side of my pillow, on that,at the head of the bed, at the foot, behind the half-opened door of thedressing-room, in the dressing-room, in the room overhead, in the roombeneath,—everywhere. At last, when the night was slow to creep on towards twoo'clock, I felt that I absolutely could no longer bear the place as a place tolie down in, and that I must get up. I therefore got up and put on my clothes,and went out across the yard into the long stone passage, designing to gain theouter courtyard and walk there for the relief of my mind. But I was no soonerin the passage than I extinguished my candle; for I saw Miss Havisham goingalong it in a ghostly manner, making a low cry. I followed her at a distance,and saw her go up the staircase. She carried a bare candle in her hand, whichshe had probably taken from one of the sconces in her own room, and was a mostunearthly object by its light. Standing at the bottom of the staircase, I feltthe mildewed air of the feast-chamber, without seeing her open the door, and Iheard her walking there, and so across into her own room, and so across againinto that, never ceasing the low cry. After a time, I tried in the dark both toget out, and to go back, but I could do neither until some streaks of daystrayed in and showed me where to lay my hands. During the whole interval,whenever I went to the bottom of the staircase, I heard her footstep, saw herlight pass above, and heard her ceaseless low cry.
Before we left next day, there was no revival of the difference between her andEstella, nor was it ever revived on any similar occasion; and there were foursimilar occasions, to the best of my remembrance. Nor, did Miss Havisham'smanner towards Estella in anywise change, except that I believed it to havesomething like fear infused among its former characteristics.
It is impossible to turn this leaf of my life, without putting BentleyDrummle's name upon it; or I would, very gladly.
On a certain occasion when the Finches were assembled in force, and when goodfeeling was being promoted in the usual manner by nobody's agreeing withanybody else, the presiding Finch called the Grove to order, forasmuch as Mr.Drummle had not yet toasted a lady; which, according to the solemn constitutionof the society, it was the brute's turn to do that day. I thought I saw himleer in an ugly way at me while the decanters were going round, but as therewas no love lost between us, that might easily be. What was my indignantsurprise when he called upon the company to pledge him to "Estella!"
"Estella who?" said I.
"Never you mind," retorted Drummle.
"Estella of where?" said I. "You are bound to say of where." Which he was, as aFinch.
"Of Richmond, gentlemen," said Drummle, putting me out of the question, "and apeerless beauty."
Much he knew about peerless beauties, a mean, miserable idiot! I whisperedHerbert.
"I know that lady," said Herbert, across the table, when the toast had beenhonoured.
"Do you?" said Drummle.
"And so do I," I added, with a scarlet face.
"Do you?" said Drummle. "O, Lord!"
This was the only retort—except glass or crockery—that the heavy creature wascapable of making; but, I became as highly incensed by it as if it had beenbarbed with wit, and I immediately rose in my place and said that I could notbut regard it as being like the honourable Finch's impudence to come down tothat Grove,—we always talked about coming down to that Grove, as a neatParliamentary turn of expression,—down to that Grove, proposing a lady of whomhe knew nothing. Mr. Drummle, upon this, starting up, demanded what I meant bythat? Whereupon I made him the extreme reply that I believed he knew where Iwas to be found.
Whether it was possible in a Christian country to get on without blood, afterthis, was a question on which the Finches were divided. The debate upon it grewso lively, indeed, that at least six more honourable members told six more,during the discussion, that they believed they knew where theywere to be found. However, it was decided at last (the Grove being a Court ofHonour) that if Mr. Drummle would bring never so slight a certificate from thelady, importing that he had the honour of her acquaintance, Mr. Pip mustexpress his regret, as a gentleman and a Finch, for "having been betrayed intoa warmth which." Next day was appointed for the production (lest our honourshould take cold from delay), and next day Drummle appeared with a politelittle avowal in Estella's hand, that she had had the honour of dancing withhim several times. This left me no course but to regret that I had been"betrayed into a warmth which," and on the whole to repudiate, as untenable,the idea that I was to be found anywhere. Drummle and I then sat snorting atone another for an hour, while the Grove engaged in indiscriminatecontradiction, and finally the promotion of good feeling was declared to havegone ahead at an amazing rate.
I tell this lightly, but it was no light thing to me. For, I cannot adequatelyexpress what pain it gave me to think that Estella should show any favour to acontemptible, clumsy, sulky booby, so very far below the average. To thepresent moment, I believe it to have been referable to some pure fire ofgenerosity and disinterestedness in my love for her, that I could not endurethe thought of her stooping to that hound. No doubt I should have beenmiserable whomsoever she had favoured; but a worthier object would have causedme a different kind and degree of distress.
It was easy for me to find out, and I did soon find out, that Drummle had begunto follow her closely, and that she allowed him to do it. A little while, andhe was always in pursuit of her, and he and I crossed one another every day. Heheld on, in a dull persistent way, and Estella held him on; now withencouragement, now with discouragement, now almost flattering him, now openlydespising him, now knowing him very well, now scarcely remembering who he was.
The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him, was used to lying in wait, however,and had the patience of his tribe. Added to that, he had a blockhead confidencein his money and in his family greatness, which sometimes did him goodservice,—almost taking the place of concentration and determined purpose. So,the Spider, doggedly watching Estella, outwatched many brighter insects, andwould often uncoil himself and drop at the right nick of time.
At a certain Assembly Ball at Richmond (there used to be Assembly Balls at mostplaces then), where Estella had outshone all other beauties, this blunderingDrummle so hung about her, and with so much toleration on her part, that Iresolved to speak to her concerning him. I took the next opportunity; which waswhen she was waiting for Mrs. Blandley to take her home, and was sitting apartamong some flowers, ready to go. I was with her, for I almost alwaysaccompanied them to and from such places.
"Are you tired, Estella?"
"Rather, Pip."
"You should be."
"Say rather, I should not be; for I have my letter to Satis House to write,before I go to sleep."
"Recounting to-night's triumph?" said I. "Surely a very poor one, Estella."
"What do you mean? I didn't know there had been any."
"Estella," said I, "do look at that fellow in the corner yonder, who is lookingover here at us."
"Why should I look at him?" returned Estella, with her eyes on me instead."What is there in that fellow in the corner yonder,—to use your words,—that Ineed look at?"
"Indeed, that is the very question I want to ask you," said I. "For he has beenhovering about you all night."
"Moths, and all sorts of ugly creatures," replied Estella, with a glancetowards him, "hover about a lighted candle. Can the candle help it?"
"No," I returned; "but cannot the Estella help it?"
"Well!" said she, laughing, after a moment, "perhaps. Yes. Anything you like."
"But, Estella, do hear me speak. It makes me wretched that you should encouragea man so generally despised as Drummle. You know he is despised."
"Well?" said she.
"You know he is as ungainly within as without. A deficient, ill-tempered,lowering, stupid fellow."
"Well?" said she.
"You know he has nothing to recommend him but money and a ridiculous roll ofaddle-headed predecessors; now, don't you?"
"Well?" said she again; and each time she said it, she opened her lovely eyesthe wider.
To overcome the difficulty of getting past that monosyllable, I took it fromher, and said, repeating it with emphasis, "Well! Then, that is why it makes mewretched."
Now, if I could have believed that she favoured Drummle with any idea of makingme—me—wretched, I should have been in better heart about it; but in thathabitual way of hers, she put me so entirely out of the question, that I couldbelieve nothing of the kind.
"Pip," said Estella, casting her glance over the room, "don't be foolish aboutits effect on you. It may have its effect on others, and may be meant to have.It's not worth discussing."
"Yes it is," said I, "because I cannot bear that people should say, ‘she throwsaway her graces and attractions on a mere boor, the lowest in the crowd.'"
"I can bear it," said Estella.
"Oh! don't be so proud, Estella, and so inflexible."
"Calls me proud and inflexible in this breath!" said Estella, opening herhands. "And in his last breath reproached me for stooping to a boor!"
"There is no doubt you do," said I, something hurriedly, "for I have seen yougive him looks and smiles this very night, such as you never give to—me."
"Do you want me then," said Estella, turning suddenly with a fixed and serious,if not angry, look, "to deceive and entrap you?"
"Do you deceive and entrap him, Estella?"
"Yes, and many others,—all of them but you. Here is Mrs. Brandley. I'll say nomore."
And now that I have given the one chapter to the theme that so filled my heart,and so often made it ache and ache again, I pass on unhindered, to the eventthat had impended over me longer yet; the event that had begun to be preparedfor, before I knew that the world held Estella, and in the days when her babyintelligence was receiving its first distortions from Miss Havisham's wastinghands.
In the Eastern story, the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state inthe flush of conquest was slowly wrought out of the quarry, the tunnel for therope to hold it in its place was slowly carried through the leagues of rock,the slab was slowly raised and fitted in the roof, the rope was rove to it andslowly taken through the miles of hollow to the great iron ring. All being madeready with much labour, and the hour come, the sultan was aroused in the deadof the night, and the sharpened axe that was to sever the rope from the greatiron ring was put into his hand, and he struck with it, and the rope parted andrushed away, and the ceiling fell. So, in my case; all the work, near and afar,that tended to the end, had been accomplished; and in an instant the blow wasstruck, and the roof of my stronghold dropped upon me.
