
Chapter XXXIX.
I wasthree-and-twenty years of age. Not another word had I heard to enlighten me onthe subject of my expectations, and my twenty-third birthday was a week gone.We had left Barnard's Inn more than a year, and lived in the Temple. Ourchambers were in Garden-court, down by the river.
Mr. Pocket and I had for some time parted company as to our original relations,though we continued on the best terms. Notwithstanding my inability to settleto anything,—which I hope arose out of the restless and incomplete tenure onwhich I held my means,—I had a taste for reading, and read regularly so manyhours a day. That matter of Herbert's was still progressing, and everythingwith me was as I have brought it down to the close of the last precedingchapter.
Business had taken Herbert on a journey to Marseilles. I was alone, and had adull sense of being alone. Dispirited and anxious, long hoping that to-morrowor next week would clear my way, and long disappointed, I sadly missed thecheerful face and ready response of my friend.
It was wretched weather; stormy and wet, stormy and wet; and mud, mud, mud,deep in all the streets. Day after day, a vast heavy veil had been driving overLondon from the East, and it drove still, as if in the East there were aneternity of cloud and wind. So furious had been the gusts, that high buildingsin town had had the lead stripped off their roofs; and in the country, treeshad been torn up, and sails of windmills carried away; and gloomy accounts hadcome in from the coast, of shipwreck and death. Violent blasts of rain hadaccompanied these rages of wind, and the day just closed as I sat down to readhad been the worst of all.
Alterations have been made in that part of the Temple since that time, and ithas not now so lonely a character as it had then, nor is it so exposed to theriver. We lived at the top of the last house, and the wind rushing up the rivershook the house that night, like discharges of cannon, or breakings of a sea.When the rain came with it and dashed against the windows, I thought, raisingmy eyes to them as they rocked, that I might have fancied myself in astorm-beaten lighthouse. Occasionally, the smoke came rolling down the chimneyas though it could not bear to go out into such a night; and when I set thedoors open and looked down the staircase, the staircase lamps were blown out;and when I shaded my face with my hands and looked through the black windows(opening them ever so little was out of the question in the teeth of such windand rain), I saw that the lamps in the court were blown out, and that the lampson the bridges and the shore were shuddering, and that the coal-fires in bargeson the river were being carried away before the wind like red-hot splashes inthe rain.
I read with my watch upon the table, purposing to close my book at eleveno'clock. As I shut it, Saint Paul's, and all the many church-clocks in theCity—some leading, some accompanying, some following—struck that hour. Thesound was curiously flawed by the wind; and I was listening, and thinking howthe wind assailed and tore it, when I heard a footstep on the stair.
What nervous folly made me start, and awfully connect it with the footstep ofmy dead sister, matters not. It was past in a moment, and I listened again, andheard the footstep stumble in coming on. Remembering then, that thestaircase-lights were blown out, I took up my reading-lamp and went out to thestair-head. Whoever was below had stopped on seeing my lamp, for all was quiet.
"There is some one down there, is there not?" I called out, looking down.
"Yes," said a voice from the darkness beneath.
"What floor do you want?"
"The top. Mr. Pip."
"That is my name.—There is nothing the matter?"
"Nothing the matter," returned the voice. And the man came on.
I stood with my lamp held out over the stair-rail, and he came slowly withinits light. It was a shaded lamp, to shine upon a book, and its circle of lightwas very contracted; so that he was in it for a mere instant, and then out ofit. In the instant, I had seen a face that was strange to me, looking up withan incomprehensible air of being touched and pleased by the sight of me.
Moving the lamp as the man moved, I made out that he was substantially dressed,but roughly, like a voyager by sea. That he had long iron-grey hair. That hisage was about sixty. That he was a muscular man, strong on his legs, and thathe was browned and hardened by exposure to weather. As he ascended the laststair or two, and the light of my lamp included us both, I saw, with a stupidkind of amazement, that he was holding out both his hands to me.
"Pray what is your business?" I asked him.
"My business?" he repeated, pausing. "Ah! Yes. I will explain my business, byyour leave."
"Do you wish to come in?"
"Yes," he replied; "I wish to come in, master."
I had asked him the question inhospitably enough, for I resented the sort ofbright and gratified recognition that still shone in his face. I resented it,because it seemed to imply that he expected me to respond to it. But I took himinto the room I had just left, and, having set the lamp on the table, asked himas civilly as I could to explain himself.
He looked about him with the strangest air,—an air of wondering pleasure, as ifhe had some part in the things he admired,—and he pulled off a rough outercoat, and his hat. Then, I saw that his head was furrowed and bald, and thatthe long iron-grey hair grew only on its sides. But, I saw nothing that in theleast explained him. On the contrary, I saw him next moment, once more holdingout both his hands to me.
"What do you mean?" said I, half suspecting him to be mad.
He stopped in his looking at me, and slowly rubbed his right hand over hishead. "It's disapinting to a man," he said, in a coarse broken voice, "arterhaving looked for'ard so distant, and come so fur; but you're not to blame forthat,—neither on us is to blame for that. I'll speak in half a minute. Give mehalf a minute, please."
He sat down on a chair that stood before the fire, and covered his foreheadwith his large brown veinous hands. I looked at him attentively then, andrecoiled a little from him; but I did not know him.
"There's no one nigh," said he, looking over his shoulder; "is there?"
"Why do you, a stranger coming into my rooms at this time of the night, askthat question?" said I.
"You're a game one," he returned, shaking his head at me with a deliberateaffection, at once most unintelligible and most exasperating; "I'm glad you'vegrow'd up, a game one! But don't catch hold of me. You'd be sorry arterwards tohave done it."
I relinquished the intention he had detected, for I knew him! Even yet I couldnot recall a single feature, but I knew him! If the wind and the rain haddriven away the intervening years, had scattered all the intervening objects,had swept us to the churchyard where we first stood face to face on suchdifferent levels, I could not have known my convict more distinctly than I knewhim now as he sat in the chair before the fire. No need to take a file from hispocket and show it to me; no need to take the handkerchief from his neck andtwist it round his head; no need to hug himself with both his arms, and take ashivering turn across the room, looking back at me for recognition. I knew himbefore he gave me one of those aids, though, a moment before, I had not beenconscious of remotely suspecting his identity.
He came back to where I stood, and again held out both his hands. Not knowingwhat to do,—for, in my astonishment I had lost my self-possession,—Ireluctantly gave him my hands. He grasped them heartily, raised them to hislips, kissed them, and still held them.
"You acted noble, my boy," said he. "Noble, Pip! And I have never forgot it!"
At a change in his manner as if he were even going to embrace me, I laid a handupon his breast and put him away.
"Stay!" said I. "Keep off! If you are grateful to me for what I did when I wasa little child, I hope you have shown your gratitude by mending your way oflife. If you have come here to thank me, it was not necessary. Still, howeveryou have found me out, there must be something good in the feeling that hasbrought you here, and I will not repulse you; but surely you must understandthat—I—"
My attention was so attracted by the singularity of his fixed look at me, thatthe words died away on my tongue.
"You was a-saying," he observed, when we had confronted one another in silence,"that surely I must understand. What, surely must I understand?"
"That I cannot wish to renew that chance intercourse with you of long ago,under these different circumstances. I am glad to believe you have repented andrecovered yourself. I am glad to tell you so. I am glad that, thinking Ideserve to be thanked, you have come to thank me. But our ways are differentways, none the less. You are wet, and you look weary. Will you drink somethingbefore you go?"
He had replaced his neckerchief loosely, and had stood, keenly observant of me,biting a long end of it. "I think," he answered, still with the end at hismouth and still observant of me, "that I will drink (I thank you) aforeI go."
There was a tray ready on a side-table. I brought it to the table near thefire, and asked him what he would have? He touched one of the bottles withoutlooking at it or speaking, and I made him some hot rum and water. I tried tokeep my hand steady while I did so, but his look at me as he leaned back in hischair with the long draggled end of his neckerchief between his teeth—evidentlyforgotten—made my hand very difficult to master. When at last I put the glassto him, I saw with amazement that his eyes were full of tears.
Up to this time I had remained standing, not to disguise that I wished himgone. But I was softened by the softened aspect of the man, and felt a touch ofreproach. "I hope," said I, hurriedly putting something into a glass formyself, and drawing a chair to the table, "that you will not think I spokeharshly to you just now. I had no intention of doing it, and I am sorry for itif I did. I wish you well and happy!"
As I put my glass to my lips, he glanced with surprise at the end of hisneckerchief, dropping from his mouth when he opened it, and stretched out hishand. I gave him mine, and then he drank, and drew his sleeve across his eyesand forehead.
"How are you living?" I asked him.
"I've been a sheep-farmer, stock-breeder, other trades besides, away in the newworld," said he; "many a thousand mile of stormy water off from this."
"I hope you have done well?"
"I've done wonderfully well. There's others went out alonger me as has donewell too, but no man has done nigh as well as me. I'm famous for it."
"I am glad to hear it."
"I hope to hear you say so, my dear boy."
Without stopping to try to understand those words or the tone in which theywere spoken, I turned off to a point that had just come into my mind.
"Have you ever seen a messenger you once sent to me," I inquired, "since heundertook that trust?"
"Never set eyes upon him. I warn't likely to it."
"He came faithfully, and he brought me the two one-pound notes. I was a poorboy then, as you know, and to a poor boy they were a little fortune. But, likeyou, I have done well since, and you must let me pay them back. You can putthem to some other poor boy's use." I took out my purse.
He watched me as I laid my purse upon the table and opened it, and he watchedme as I separated two one-pound notes from its contents. They were clean andnew, and I spread them out and handed them over to him. Still watching me, helaid them one upon the other, folded them long-wise, gave them a twist, setfire to them at the lamp, and dropped the ashes into the tray.
"May I make so bold," he said then, with a smile that was like a frown, andwith a frown that was like a smile, "as ask you how you have done well,since you and me was out on them lone shivering marshes?"
"How?"
"Ah!"
He emptied his glass, got up, and stood at the side of the fire, with his heavybrown hand on the mantel-shelf. He put a foot up to the bars, to dry and warmit, and the wet boot began to steam; but, he neither looked at it, nor at thefire, but steadily looked at me. It was only now that I began to tremble.
When my lips had parted, and had shaped some words that were without sound, Iforced myself to tell him (though I could not do it distinctly), that I hadbeen chosen to succeed to some property.
"Might a mere warmint ask what property?" said he.
I faltered, "I don't know."
"Might a mere warmint ask whose property?" said he.
I faltered again, "I don't know."
"Could I make a guess, I wonder," said the Convict, "at your income since youcome of age! As to the first figure now. Five?"
With my heart beating like a heavy hammer of disordered action, I rose out ofmy chair, and stood with my hand upon the back of it, looking wildly at him.
"Concerning a guardian," he went on. "There ought to have been some guardian,or such-like, whiles you was a minor. Some lawyer, maybe. As to the firstletter of that lawyer's name now. Would it be J?"
All the truth of my position came flashing on me; and its disappointments,dangers, disgraces, consequences of all kinds, rushed in in such a multitudethat I was borne down by them and had to struggle for every breath I drew.
"Put it," he resumed, "as the employer of that lawyer whose name begun with aJ, and might be Jaggers,—put it as he had come over sea to Portsmouth, and hadlanded there, and had wanted to come on to you. ‘However, you have found meout,' you says just now. Well! However, did I find you out? Why, I wrote fromPortsmouth to a person in London, for particulars of your address. Thatperson's name? Why, Wemmick."
I could not have spoken one word, though it had been to save my life. I stood,with a hand on the chair-back and a hand on my breast, where I seemed to besuffocating,—I stood so, looking wildly at him, until I grasped at the chair,when the room began to surge and turn. He caught me, drew me to the sofa, putme up against the cushions, and bent on one knee before me, bringing the facethat I now well remembered, and that I shuddered at, very near to mine.
"Yes, Pip, dear boy, I've made a gentleman on you! It's me wot has done it! Iswore that time, sure as ever I earned a guinea, that guinea should go to you.I swore arterwards, sure as ever I spec'lated and got rich, you should getrich. I lived rough, that you should live smooth; I worked hard, that youshould be above work. What odds, dear boy? Do I tell it, fur you to feel aobligation? Not a bit. I tell it, fur you to know as that there hunted dunghilldog wot you kep life in, got his head so high that he could make agentleman,—and, Pip, you're him!"
The abhorrence in which I held the man, the dread I had of him, the repugnancewith which I shrank from him, could not have been exceeded if he had been someterrible beast.
"Look'ee here, Pip. I'm your second father. You're my son,—more to me nor anyson. I've put away money, only for you to spend. When I was a hired-outshepherd in a solitary hut, not seeing no faces but faces of sheep till I halfforgot wot men's and women's faces wos like, I see yourn. I drops my knife manya time in that hut when I was a-eating my dinner or my supper, and I says,‘Here's the boy again, a looking at me whiles I eats and drinks!' I see youthere a many times, as plain as ever I see you on them misty marshes. ‘Lordstrike me dead!' I says each time,—and I goes out in the air to say it underthe open heavens,—‘but wot, if I gets liberty and money, I'll make that boy agentleman!' And I done it. Why, look at you, dear boy! Look at these herelodgings of yourn, fit for a lord! A lord? Ah! You shall show money with lordsfor wagers, and beat 'em!"
In his heat and triumph, and in his knowledge that I had been nearly fainting,he did not remark on my reception of all this. It was the one grain of relief Ihad.
"Look'ee here!" he went on, taking my watch out of my pocket, and turningtowards him a ring on my finger, while I recoiled from his touch as if he hadbeen a snake, "a gold 'un and a beauty: that's a gentleman's, I hope! Adiamond all set round with rubies; that's a gentleman's, I hope! Look atyour linen; fine and beautiful! Look at your clothes; better ain't to be got!And your books too," turning his eyes round the room, "mounting up, on theirshelves, by hundreds! And you read 'em; don't you? I see you'd been a readingof 'em when I come in. Ha, ha, ha! You shall read 'em to me, dear boy! And ifthey're in foreign languages wot I don't understand, I shall be just as proudas if I did."
Again he took both my hands and put them to his lips, while my blood ran coldwithin me.
"Don't you mind talking, Pip," said he, after again drawing his sleeve over hiseyes and forehead, as the click came in his throat which I well remembered,—andhe was all the more horrible to me that he was so much in earnest; "you can'tdo better nor keep quiet, dear boy. You ain't looked slowly forward to this asI have; you wosn't prepared for this as I wos. But didn't you never think itmight be me?"
"O no, no, no," I returned, "Never, never!"
"Well, you see it wos me, and single-handed. Never a soul in it but myown self and Mr. Jaggers."
"Was there no one else?" I asked.
"No," said he, with a glance of surprise: "who else should there be? And, dearboy, how good looking you have growed! There's bright eyes somewheres—eh? Isn'tthere bright eyes somewheres, wot you love the thoughts on?"
O Estella, Estella!
"They shall be yourn, dear boy, if money can buy 'em. Not that a gentleman likeyou, so well set up as you, can't win 'em off of his own game; but money shallback you! Let me finish wot I was a telling you, dear boy. From that there hutand that there hiring-out, I got money left me by my master (which died, andhad been the same as me), and got my liberty and went for myself. In everysingle thing I went for, I went for you. ‘Lord strike a blight upon it,' Isays, wotever it was I went for, ‘if it ain't for him!' It all prosperedwonderful. As I giv' you to understand just now, I'm famous for it. It was themoney left me, and the gains of the first few year wot I sent home to Mr.Jaggers—all for you—when he first come arter you, agreeable to my letter."
O that he had never come! That he had left me at the forge,—far from contented,yet, by comparison happy!
"And then, dear boy, it was a recompense to me, look'ee here, to know in secretthat I was making a gentleman. The blood horses of them colonists might flingup the dust over me as I was walking; what do I say? I says to myself, ‘I'mmaking a better gentleman nor ever you'll be!' When one of 'em says toanother, ‘He was a convict, a few year ago, and is a ignorant common fellownow, for all he's lucky,' what do I say? I says to myself, ‘If I ain't agentleman, nor yet ain't got no learning, I'm the owner of such. All on youowns stock and land; which on you owns a brought-up London gentleman?' This wayI kep myself a-going. And this way I held steady afore my mind that I would forcertain come one day and see my boy, and make myself known to him, on his ownground."
He laid his hand on my shoulder. I shuddered at the thought that for anything Iknew, his hand might be stained with blood.
"It warn't easy, Pip, for me to leave them parts, nor yet it warn't safe. But Iheld to it, and the harder it was, the stronger I held, for I was determined,and my mind firm made up. At last I done it. Dear boy, I done it!"
I tried to collect my thoughts, but I was stunned. Throughout, I had seemed tomyself to attend more to the wind and the rain than to him; even now, I couldnot separate his voice from those voices, though those were loud and his wassilent.
"Where will you put me?" he asked, presently. "I must be put somewheres, dearboy."
"To sleep?" said I.
"Yes. And to sleep long and sound," he answered; "for I've been sea-tossed andsea-washed, months and months."
"My friend and companion," said I, rising from the sofa, "is absent; you musthave his room."
"He won't come back to-morrow; will he?"
"No," said I, answering almost mechanically, in spite of my utmost efforts;"not to-morrow."
"Because, look'ee here, dear boy," he said, dropping his voice, and laying along finger on my breast in an impressive manner, "caution is necessary."
"How do you mean? Caution?"
"By G——, it's Death!"
"What's death?"
"I was sent for life. It's death to come back. There's been overmuch comingback of late years, and I should of a certainty be hanged if took."
Nothing was needed but this; the wretched man, after loading wretched me withhis gold and silver chains for years, had risked his life to come to me, and Iheld it there in my keeping! If I had loved him instead of abhorring him; if Ihad been attracted to him by the strongest admiration and affection, instead ofshrinking from him with the strongest repugnance; it could have been no worse.On the contrary, it would have been better, for his preservation would thenhave naturally and tenderly addressed my heart.
My first care was to close the shutters, so that no light might be seen fromwithout, and then to close and make fast the doors. While I did so, he stood atthe table drinking rum and eating biscuit; and when I saw him thus engaged, Isaw my convict on the marshes at his meal again. It almost seemed to me as ifhe must stoop down presently, to file at his leg.
When I had gone into Herbert's room, and had shut off any other communicationbetween it and the staircase than through the room in which our conversationhad been held, I asked him if he would go to bed? He said yes, but asked me forsome of my "gentleman's linen" to put on in the morning. I brought it out, andlaid it ready for him, and my blood again ran cold when he again took me byboth hands to give me good-night.
I got away from him, without knowing how I did it, and mended the fire in theroom where we had been together, and sat down by it, afraid to go to bed. Foran hour or more, I remained too stunned to think; and it was not until I beganto think, that I began fully to know how wrecked I was, and how the ship inwhich I had sailed was gone to pieces.
Miss Havisham's intentions towards me, all a mere dream; Estella not designedfor me; I only suffered in Satis House as a convenience, a sting for the greedyrelations, a model with a mechanical heart to practise on when no otherpractice was at hand; those were the first smarts I had. But, sharpest anddeepest pain of all,—it was for the convict, guilty of I knew not what crimes,and liable to be taken out of those rooms where I sat thinking, and hanged atthe Old Bailey door, that I had deserted Joe.
I would not have gone back to Joe now, I would not have gone back to Biddy now,for any consideration; simply, I suppose, because my sense of my own worthlessconduct to them was greater than every consideration. No wisdom on earth couldhave given me the comfort that I should have derived from their simplicity andfidelity; but I could never, never, undo what I had done.
In every rage of wind and rush of rain, I heard pursuers. Twice, I could havesworn there was a knocking and whispering at the outer door. With these fearsupon me, I began either to imagine or recall that I had had mysterious warningsof this man's approach. That, for weeks gone by, I had passed faces in thestreets which I had thought like his. That these likenesses had grown morenumerous, as he, coming over the sea, had drawn nearer. That his wicked spirithad somehow sent these messengers to mine, and that now on this stormy night hewas as good as his word, and with me.
Crowding up with these reflections came the reflection that I had seen him withmy childish eyes to be a desperately violent man; that I had heard that otherconvict reiterate that he had tried to murder him; that I had seen him down inthe ditch tearing and fighting like a wild beast. Out of such remembrances Ibrought into the light of the fire a half-formed terror that it might not besafe to be shut up there with him in the dead of the wild solitary night. Thisdilated until it filled the room, and impelled me to take a candle and go inand look at my dreadful burden.
He had rolled a handkerchief round his head, and his face was set and loweringin his sleep. But he was asleep, and quietly too, though he had a pistol lyingon the pillow. Assured of this, I softly removed the key to the outside of hisdoor, and turned it on him before I again sat down by the fire. Gradually Islipped from the chair and lay on the floor. When I awoke without having partedin my sleep with the perception of my wretchedness, the clocks of the Eastwardchurches were striking five, the candles were wasted out, the fire was dead,and the wind and rain intensified the thick black darkness.
THIS IS THE END OF THE SECOND STAGE OF PIP'S EXPECTATIONS.
