
Chapter IV.
Ifully expected to find a Constable in the kitchen, waiting to take me up. Butnot only was there no Constable there, but no discovery had yet been made ofthe robbery. Mrs. Joe was prodigiously busy in getting the house ready for thefestivities of the day, and Joe had been put upon the kitchen doorstep to keephim out of the dust-pan,—an article into which his destiny always led him,sooner or later, when my sister was vigorously reaping the floors of herestablishment.
"And where the deuce ha' you been?" was Mrs. Joe's Christmas salutation,when I and my conscience showed ourselves.
I said I had been down to hear the Carols. "Ah! well!" observed Mrs. Joe. "Youmight ha' done worse." Not a doubt of that I thought.
"Perhaps if I warn't a blacksmith's wife, and (what's the same thing) a slavewith her apron never off, I should have been to hear the Carols," saidMrs. Joe. "I'm rather partial to Carols, myself, and that's the best of reasonsfor my never hearing any."
Joe, who had ventured into the kitchen after me as the dustpan had retiredbefore us, drew the back of his hand across his nose with a conciliatory air,when Mrs. Joe darted a look at him, and, when her eyes were withdrawn, secretlycrossed his two forefingers, and exhibited them to me, as our token that Mrs.Joe was in a cross temper. This was so much her normal state, that Joe and Iwould often, for weeks together, be, as to our fingers, like monumentalCrusaders as to their legs.
We were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of pickled pork andgreens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls. A handsome mince-pie had been madeyesterday morning (which accounted for the mincemeat not being missed), and thepudding was already on the boil. These extensive arrangements occasioned us tobe cut off unceremoniously in respect of breakfast; "for I ain't," said Mrs.Joe,—"I ain't a-going to have no formal cramming and busting and washing upnow, with what I've got before me, I promise you!"
So, we had our slices served out, as if we were two thousand troops on a forcedmarch instead of a man and boy at home; and we took gulps of milk and water,with apologetic countenances, from a jug on the dresser. In the meantime, Mrs.Joe put clean white curtains up, and tacked a new flowered flounce across thewide chimney to replace the old one, and uncovered the little state parlouracross the passage, which was never uncovered at any other time, but passed therest of the year in a cool haze of silver paper, which even extended to thefour little white crockery poodles on the mantel-shelf, each with a black noseand a basket of flowers in his mouth, and each the counterpart of the other.Mrs. Joe was a very clean housekeeper, but had an exquisite art of making hercleanliness more uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself. Cleanlinessis next to Godliness, and some people do the same by their religion.
My sister, having so much to do, was going to church vicariously, that is tosay, Joe and I were going. In his working-clothes, Joe was a well-knitcharacteristic-looking blacksmith; in his holiday clothes, he was more like ascarecrow in good circumstances, than anything else. Nothing that he wore thenfitted him or seemed to belong to him; and everything that he wore then grazedhim. On the present festive occasion he emerged from his room, when the blithebells were going, the picture of misery, in a full suit of Sunday penitentials.As to me, I think my sister must have had some general idea that I was a youngoffender whom an Accoucheur Policeman had taken up (on my birthday) anddelivered over to her, to be dealt with according to the outraged majesty ofthe law. I was always treated as if I had insisted on being born in oppositionto the dictates of reason, religion, and morality, and against the dissuadingarguments of my best friends. Even when I was taken to have a new suit ofclothes, the tailor had orders to make them like a kind of Reformatory, and onno account to let me have the free use of my limbs.
Joe and I going to church, therefore, must have been a moving spectacle forcompassionate minds. Yet, what I suffered outside was nothing to what Iunderwent within. The terrors that had assailed me whenever Mrs. Joe had gonenear the pantry, or out of the room, were only to be equalled by the remorsewith which my mind dwelt on what my hands had done. Under the weight of mywicked secret, I pondered whether the Church would be powerful enough to shieldme from the vengeance of the terrible young man, if I divulged to thatestablishment. I conceived the idea that the time when the banns were read andwhen the clergyman said, "Ye are now to declare it!" would be the time for meto rise and propose a private conference in the vestry. I am far from beingsure that I might not have astonished our small congregation by resorting tothis extreme measure, but for its being Christmas Day and no Sunday.
Mr. Wopsle, the clerk at church, was to dine with us; and Mr. Hubble thewheelwright and Mrs. Hubble; and Uncle Pumblechook (Joe's uncle, but Mrs. Joeappropriated him), who was a well-to-do cornchandler in the nearest town, anddrove his own chaise-cart. The dinner hour was half-past one. When Joe and Igot home, we found the table laid, and Mrs. Joe dressed, and the dinnerdressing, and the front door unlocked (it never was at any other time) for thecompany to enter by, and everything most splendid. And still, not a word of therobbery.
The time came, without bringing with it any relief to my feelings, and thecompany came. Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining baldforehead, had a deep voice which he was uncommonly proud of; indeed it wasunderstood among his acquaintance that if you could only give him his head, hewould read the clergyman into fits; he himself confessed that if the Church was"thrown open," meaning to competition, he would not despair of making his markin it. The Church not being "thrown open," he was, as I have said, our clerk.But he punished the Amens tremendously; and when he gave out the psalm,—alwaysgiving the whole verse,—he looked all round the congregation first, as much asto say, "You have heard my friend overhead; oblige me with your opinion of thisstyle!"
I opened the door to the company,—making believe that it was a habit of ours toopen that door,—and I opened it first to Mr. Wopsle, next to Mr. and Mrs.Hubble, and last of all to Uncle Pumblechook. N.B. I was not allowed tocall him uncle, under the severest penalties.
"Mrs. Joe," said Uncle Pumblechook, a large hard-breathing middle-aged slowman, with a mouth like a fish, dull staring eyes, and sandy hair standingupright on his head, so that he looked as if he had just been all but choked,and had that moment come to, "I have brought you as the compliments of theseason—I have brought you, Mum, a bottle of sherry wine—and I have brought you,Mum, a bottle of port wine."
Every Christmas Day he presented himself, as a profound novelty, with exactlythe same words, and carrying the two bottles like dumb-bells. Every ChristmasDay, Mrs. Joe replied, as she now replied, "O, Un—cle Pum-ble—chook! Thisis kind!" Every Christmas Day, he retorted, as he now retorted, "It's nomore than your merits. And now are you all bobbish, and how's Sixpennorth ofhalfpence?" meaning me.
We dined on these occasions in the kitchen, and adjourned, for the nuts andoranges and apples to the parlour; which was a change very like Joe's changefrom his working-clothes to his Sunday dress. My sister was uncommonly livelyon the present occasion, and indeed was generally more gracious in the societyof Mrs. Hubble than in other company. I remember Mrs. Hubble as a little curlysharp-edged person in sky-blue, who held a conventionally juvenile position,because she had married Mr. Hubble,—I don't know at what remote period,—whenshe was much younger than he. I remember Mr Hubble as a tough, high-shouldered,stooping old man, of a sawdusty fragrance, with his legs extraordinarily wideapart: so that in my short days I always saw some miles of open country betweenthem when I met him coming up the lane.
Among this good company I should have felt myself, even if I hadn't robbed thepantry, in a false position. Not because I was squeezed in at an acute angle ofthe tablecloth, with the table in my chest, and the Pumblechookian elbow in myeye, nor because I was not allowed to speak (I didn't want to speak), norbecause I was regaled with the scaly tips of the drumsticks of the fowls, andwith those obscure corners of pork of which the pig, when living, had had theleast reason to be vain. No; I should not have minded that, if they would onlyhave left me alone. But they wouldn't leave me alone. They seemed to think theopportunity lost, if they failed to point the conversation at me, every now andthen, and stick the point into me. I might have been an unfortunate little bullin a Spanish arena, I got so smartingly touched up by these moral goads.
It began the moment we sat down to dinner. Mr. Wopsle said grace withtheatrical declamation,—as it now appears to me, something like a religiouscross of the Ghost in Hamlet with Richard the Third,—and ended with the veryproper aspiration that we might be truly grateful. Upon which my sister fixedme with her eye, and said, in a low reproachful voice, "Do you hear that? Begrateful."
"Especially," said Mr. Pumblechook, "be grateful, boy, to them which broughtyou up by hand."
Mrs. Hubble shook her head, and contemplating me with a mournful presentimentthat I should come to no good, asked, "Why is it that the young are nevergrateful?" This moral mystery seemed too much for the company until Mr. Hubbletersely solved it by saying, "Naterally wicious." Everybody then murmured"True!" and looked at me in a particularly unpleasant and personal manner.
Joe's station and influence were something feebler (if possible) when there wascompany than when there was none. But he always aided and comforted me when hecould, in some way of his own, and he always did so at dinner-time by giving megravy, if there were any. There being plenty of gravy to-day, Joe spooned intomy plate, at this point, about half a pint.
A little later on in the dinner, Mr. Wopsle reviewed the sermon with someseverity, and intimated—in the usual hypothetical case of the Church being"thrown open"—what kind of sermon he would have given them. Afterfavouring them with some heads of that discourse, he remarked that heconsidered the subject of the day's homily, ill chosen; which was the lessexcusable, he added, when there were so many subjects "going about."
"True again," said Uncle Pumblechook. "You've hit it, sir! Plenty of subjectsgoing about, for them that know how to put salt upon their tails. That's what'swanted. A man needn't go far to find a subject, if he's ready with hissalt-box." Mr. Pumblechook added, after a short interval of reflection, "Lookat Pork alone. There's a subject! If you want a subject, look at Pork!"
"True, sir. Many a moral for the young," returned Mr. Wopsle,—and I knew he wasgoing to lug me in, before he said it; "might be deduced from that text."
("You listen to this," said my sister to me, in a severe parenthesis.)
Joe gave me some more gravy.
"Swine," pursued Mr. Wopsle, in his deepest voice, and pointing his fork at myblushes, as if he were mentioning my Christian name,—"swine were the companionsof the prodigal. The gluttony of Swine is put before us, as an example to theyoung." (I thought this pretty well in him who had been praising up the porkfor being so plump and juicy.) "What is detestable in a pig is more detestablein a boy."
"Or girl," suggested Mr. Hubble.
"Of course, or girl, Mr. Hubble," assented Mr. Wopsle, rather irritably, "butthere is no girl present."
"Besides," said Mr. Pumblechook, turning sharp on me, "think what you've got tobe grateful for. If you'd been born a Squeaker—"
"He was, if ever a child was," said my sister, most emphatically.
Joe gave me some more gravy.
"Well, but I mean a four-footed Squeaker," said Mr. Pumblechook. "If you hadbeen born such, would you have been here now? Not you—"
"Unless in that form," said Mr. Wopsle, nodding towards the dish.
"But I don't mean in that form, sir," returned Mr. Pumblechook, who had anobjection to being interrupted; "I mean, enjoying himself with his elders andbetters, and improving himself with their conversation, and rolling in the lapof luxury. Would he have been doing that? No, he wouldn't. And what would havebeen your destination?" turning on me again. "You would have been disposed offor so many shillings according to the market price of the article, andDunstable the butcher would have come up to you as you lay in your straw, andhe would have whipped you under his left arm, and with his right he would havetucked up his frock to get a penknife from out of his waistcoat-pocket, and hewould have shed your blood and had your life. No bringing up by hand then. Nota bit of it!"
Joe offered me more gravy, which I was afraid to take.
"He was a world of trouble to you, ma'am," said Mrs. Hubble, commiserating mysister.
"Trouble?" echoed my sister; "trouble?" and then entered on a fearful catalogueof all the illnesses I had been guilty of, and all the acts of sleeplessness Ihad committed, and all the high places I had tumbled from, and all the lowplaces I had tumbled into, and all the injuries I had done myself, and all thetimes she had wished me in my grave, and I had contumaciously refused to gothere.
I think the Romans must have aggravated one another very much, with theirnoses. Perhaps, they became the restless people they were, in consequence.Anyhow, Mr. Wopsle's Roman nose so aggravated me, during the recital of mymisdemeanours, that I should have liked to pull it until he howled. But, all Ihad endured up to this time was nothing in comparison with the awful feelingsthat took possession of me when the pause was broken which ensued upon mysister's recital, and in which pause everybody had looked at me (as I feltpainfully conscious) with indignation and abhorrence.
"Yet," said Mr. Pumblechook, leading the company gently back to the theme fromwhich they had strayed, "Pork—regarded as biled—is rich, too; ain't it?"
"Have a little brandy, uncle," said my sister.
O Heavens, it had come at last! He would find it was weak, he would say it wasweak, and I was lost! I held tight to the leg of the table under the cloth,with both hands, and awaited my fate.
My sister went for the stone bottle, came back with the stone bottle, andpoured his brandy out: no one else taking any. The wretched man trifled withhis glass,—took it up, looked at it through the light, put it down,—prolongedmy misery. All this time Mrs. Joe and Joe were briskly clearing the table forthe pie and pudding.
I couldn't keep my eyes off him. Always holding tight by the leg of the tablewith my hands and feet, I saw the miserable creature finger his glassplayfully, take it up, smile, throw his head back, and drink the brandy off.Instantly afterwards, the company were seized with unspeakable consternation,owing to his springing to his feet, turning round several times in an appallingspasmodic whooping-cough dance, and rushing out at the door; he then becamevisible through the window, violently plunging and expectorating, making themost hideous faces, and apparently out of his mind.
I held on tight, while Mrs. Joe and Joe ran to him. I didn't know how I haddone it, but I had no doubt I had murdered him somehow. In my dreadfulsituation, it was a relief when he was brought back, and surveying the companyall round as if they had disagreed with him, sank down into his chairwith the one significant gasp, "Tar!"
I had filled up the bottle from the tar-water jug. I knew he would be worse byand by. I moved the table, like a Medium of the present day, by the vigor of myunseen hold upon it.
"Tar!" cried my sister, in amazement. "Why, how ever could Tar come there?"
But, Uncle Pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that kitchen, wouldn't hear theword, wouldn't hear of the subject, imperiously waved it all away with hishand, and asked for hot gin and water. My sister, who had begun to bealarmingly meditative, had to employ herself actively in getting the gin, thehot water, the sugar, and the lemon-peel, and mixing them. For the time beingat least, I was saved. I still held on to the leg of the table, but clutched itnow with the fervor of gratitude.
By degrees, I became calm enough to release my grasp and partake of pudding.Mr. Pumblechook partook of pudding. All partook of pudding. The courseterminated, and Mr. Pumblechook had begun to beam under the genial influence ofgin and water. I began to think I should get over the day, when my sister saidto Joe, "Clean plates,—cold."
I clutched the leg of the table again immediately, and pressed it to my bosomas if it had been the companion of my youth and friend of my soul. I foresawwhat was coming, and I felt that this time I really was gone.
"You must taste," said my sister, addressing the guests with her bestgrace—"you must taste, to finish with, such a delightful and delicious presentof Uncle Pumblechook's!"
Must they! Let them not hope to taste it!
"You must know," said my sister, rising, "it's a pie; a savory pork pie."
The company murmured their compliments. Uncle Pumblechook, sensible of havingdeserved well of his fellow-creatures, said,—quite vivaciously, all thingsconsidered,—"Well, Mrs. Joe, we'll do our best endeavours; let us have a cut atthis same pie."
My sister went out to get it. I heard her steps proceed to the pantry. I sawMr. Pumblechook balance his knife. I saw reawakening appetite in the Romannostrils of Mr. Wopsle. I heard Mr. Hubble remark that "a bit of savory porkpie would lay atop of anything you could mention, and do no harm," and I heardJoe say, "You shall have some, Pip." I have never been absolutely certainwhether I uttered a shrill yell of terror, merely in spirit, or in the bodilyhearing of the company. I felt that I could bear no more, and that I must runaway. I released the leg of the table, and ran for my life.
But I ran no farther than the house door, for there I ran head-foremost into aparty of soldiers with their muskets, one of whom held out a pair of handcuffsto me, saying, "Here you are, look sharp, come on!"
