
Chapter XL.
It wasfortunate for me that I had to take precautions to ensure (so far as I could)the safety of my dreaded visitor; for, this thought pressing on me when Iawoke, held other thoughts in a confused concourse at a distance.
The impossibility of keeping him concealed in the chambers was self-evident. Itcould not be done, and the attempt to do it would inevitably engendersuspicion. True, I had no Avenger in my service now, but I was looked after byan inflammatory old female, assisted by an animated rag-bag whom she called herniece, and to keep a room secret from them would be to invite curiosity andexaggeration. They both had weak eyes, which I had long attributed to theirchronically looking in at keyholes, and they were always at hand when notwanted; indeed that was their only reliable quality besides larceny. Not to getup a mystery with these people, I resolved to announce in the morning that myuncle had unexpectedly come from the country.
This course I decided on while I was yet groping about in the darkness for themeans of getting a light. Not stumbling on the means after all, I was fain togo out to the adjacent Lodge and get the watchman there to come with hislantern. Now, in groping my way down the black staircase I fell over something,and that something was a man crouching in a corner.
As the man made no answer when I asked him what he did there, but eluded mytouch in silence, I ran to the Lodge and urged the watchman to come quickly;telling him of the incident on the way back. The wind being as fierce as ever,we did not care to endanger the light in the lantern by rekindling theextinguished lamps on the staircase, but we examined the staircase from thebottom to the top and found no one there. It then occurred to me as possiblethat the man might have slipped into my rooms; so, lighting my candle at thewatchman's, and leaving him standing at the door, I examined them carefully,including the room in which my dreaded guest lay asleep. All was quiet, andassuredly no other man was in those chambers.
It troubled me that there should have been a lurker on the stairs, on thatnight of all nights in the year, and I asked the watchman, on the chance ofeliciting some hopeful explanation as I handed him a dram at the door, whetherhe had admitted at his gate any gentleman who had perceptibly been dining out?Yes, he said; at different times of the night, three. One lived in FountainCourt, and the other two lived in the Lane, and he had seen them all go home.Again, the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed apart had been in the country for some weeks, and he certainly had not returnedin the night, because we had seen his door with his seal on it as we cameupstairs.
"The night being so bad, sir," said the watchman, as he gave me back my glass,"uncommon few have come in at my gate. Besides them three gentlemen that I havenamed, I don't call to mind another since about eleven o'clock, when a strangerasked for you."
"My uncle," I muttered. "Yes."
"You saw him, sir?"
"Yes. Oh yes."
"Likewise the person with him?"
"Person with him!" I repeated.
"I judged the person to be with him," returned the watchman. "The personstopped, when he stopped to make inquiry of me, and the person took this waywhen he took this way."
"What sort of person?"
The watchman had not particularly noticed; he should say a working person; tothe best of his belief, he had a dust-coloured kind of clothes on, under a darkcoat. The watchman made more light of the matter than I did, and naturally; nothaving my reason for attaching weight to it.
When I had got rid of him, which I thought it well to do without prolongingexplanations, my mind was much troubled by these two circumstances takentogether. Whereas they were easy of innocent solution apart,—as, for instance,some diner out or diner at home, who had not gone near this watchman's gate,might have strayed to my staircase and dropped asleep there,—and my namelessvisitor might have brought some one with him to show him the way,—still,joined, they had an ugly look to one as prone to distrust and fear as thechanges of a few hours had made me.
I lighted my fire, which burnt with a raw pale flare at that time of themorning, and fell into a doze before it. I seemed to have been dozing a wholenight when the clocks struck six. As there was full an hour and a half betweenme and daylight, I dozed again; now, waking up uneasily, with prolixconversations about nothing, in my ears; now, making thunder of the wind in thechimney; at length, falling off into a profound sleep from which the daylightwoke me with a start.
All this time I had never been able to consider my own situation, nor could Ido so yet. I had not the power to attend to it. I was greatly dejected anddistressed, but in an incoherent wholesale sort of way. As to forming any planfor the future, I could as soon have formed an elephant. When I opened theshutters and looked out at the wet wild morning, all of a leaden hue; when Iwalked from room to room; when I sat down again shivering, before the fire,waiting for my laundress to appear; I thought how miserable I was, but hardlyknew why, or how long I had been so, or on what day of the week I made thereflection, or even who I was that made it.
At last, the old woman and the niece came in,—the latter with a head not easilydistinguishable from her dusty broom,—and testified surprise at sight of me andthe fire. To whom I imparted how my uncle had come in the night and was thenasleep, and how the breakfast preparations were to be modified accordingly.Then I washed and dressed while they knocked the furniture about and made adust; and so, in a sort of dream or sleep-waking, I found myself sitting by thefire again, waiting for—Him—to come to breakfast.
By and by, his door opened and he came out. I could not bring myself to bearthe sight of him, and I thought he had a worse look by daylight.
"I do not even know," said I, speaking low as he took his seat at the table,"by what name to call you. I have given out that you are my uncle."
"That's it, dear boy! Call me uncle."
"You assumed some name, I suppose, on board ship?"
"Yes, dear boy. I took the name of Provis."
"Do you mean to keep that name?"
"Why, yes, dear boy, it's as good as another,—unless you'd like another."
"What is your real name?" I asked him in a whisper.
"Magwitch," he answered, in the same tone; "chrisen'd Abel."
"What were you brought up to be?"
"A warmint, dear boy."
He answered quite seriously, and used the word as if it denoted someprofession.
"When you came into the Temple last night—" said I, pausing to wonder whetherthat could really have been last night, which seemed so long ago.
"Yes, dear boy?"
"When you came in at the gate and asked the watchman the way here, had you anyone with you?"
"With me? No, dear boy."
"But there was some one there?"
"I didn't take particular notice," he said, dubiously, "not knowing the ways ofthe place. But I think there was a person, too, come in alonger me."
"Are you known in London?"
"I hope not!" said he, giving his neck a jerk with his forefinger that made meturn hot and sick.
"Were you known in London, once?"
"Not over and above, dear boy. I was in the provinces mostly."
"Were you—tried—in London?"
"Which time?" said he, with a sharp look.
"The last time."
He nodded. "First knowed Mr. Jaggers that way. Jaggers was for me."
It was on my lips to ask him what he was tried for, but he took up a knife,gave it a flourish, and with the words, "And what I done is worked out and paidfor!" fell to at his breakfast.
He ate in a ravenous way that was very disagreeable, and all his actions wereuncouth, noisy, and greedy. Some of his teeth had failed him since I saw himeat on the marshes, and as he turned his food in his mouth, and turned his headsideways to bring his strongest fangs to bear upon it, he looked terribly likea hungry old dog. If I had begun with any appetite, he would have taken itaway, and I should have sat much as I did,—repelled from him by aninsurmountable aversion, and gloomily looking at the cloth.
"I'm a heavy grubber, dear boy," he said, as a polite kind of apology when hemade an end of his meal, "but I always was. If it had been in my constitutionto be a lighter grubber, I might ha' got into lighter trouble. Similarly, Imust have my smoke. When I was first hired out as shepherd t'other side theworld, it's my belief I should ha' turned into a molloncolly-mad sheep myself,if I hadn't a had my smoke."
As he said so, he got up from table, and putting his hand into the breast ofthe pea-coat he wore, brought out a short black pipe, and a handful of loosetobacco of the kind that is called Negro-head. Having filled his pipe, he putthe surplus tobacco back again, as if his pocket were a drawer. Then, he took alive coal from the fire with the tongs, and lighted his pipe at it, and thenturned round on the hearth-rug with his back to the fire, and went through hisfavourite action of holding out both his hands for mine.
"And this," said he, dandling my hands up and down in his, as he puffed at hispipe,—"and this is the gentleman what I made! The real genuine One! It does megood fur to look at you, Pip. All I stip'late, is, to stand by and look at you,dear boy!"
I released my hands as soon as I could, and found that I was beginning slowlyto settle down to the contemplation of my condition. What I was chained to, andhow heavily, became intelligible to me, as I heard his hoarse voice, and satlooking up at his furrowed bald head with its iron grey hair at the sides.
"I mustn't see my gentleman a footing it in the mire of the streets; theremustn't be no mud on his boots. My gentleman must have horses, Pip!Horses to ride, and horses to drive, and horses for his servant to ride anddrive as well. Shall colonists have their horses (and blood 'uns, if youplease, good Lord!) and not my London gentleman? No, no. We'll show 'em anotherpair of shoes than that, Pip; won't us?"
He took out of his pocket a great thick pocket-book, bursting with papers, andtossed it on the table.
"There's something worth spending in that there book, dear boy. It's yourn. AllI've got ain't mine; it's yourn. Don't you be afeerd on it. There's more wherethat come from. I've come to the old country fur to see my gentleman spend hismoney like a gentleman. That'll be my pleasure. Mypleasure 'ull be fur to see him do it. And blast you all!" he wound up, lookinground the room and snapping his fingers once with a loud snap, "blast you everyone, from the judge in his wig, to the colonist a stirring up the dust, I'llshow a better gentleman than the whole kit on you put together!"
"Stop!" said I, almost in a frenzy of fear and dislike, "I want to speak toyou. I want to know what is to be done. I want to know how you are to be keptout of danger, how long you are going to stay, what projects you have."
"Look'ee here, Pip," said he, laying his hand on my arm in a suddenly alteredand subdued manner; "first of all, look'ee here. I forgot myself half a minuteago. What I said was low; that's what it was; low. Look'ee here, Pip. Look overit. I ain't a-going to be low."
"First," I resumed, half groaning, "what precautions can be taken against yourbeing recognised and seized?"
"No, dear boy," he said, in the same tone as before, "that don't go first.Lowness goes first. I ain't took so many year to make a gentleman, not withoutknowing what's due to him. Look'ee here, Pip. I was low; that's what I was;low. Look over it, dear boy."
Some sense of the grimly-ludicrous moved me to a fretful laugh, as I replied,"I have looked over it. In Heaven's name, don't harp upon it!"
"Yes, but look'ee here," he persisted. "Dear boy, I ain't come so fur, not furto be low. Now, go on, dear boy. You was a saying—"
"How are you to be guarded from the danger you have incurred?"
"Well, dear boy, the danger ain't so great. Without I was informed agen, thedanger ain't so much to signify. There's Jaggers, and there's Wemmick, andthere's you. Who else is there to inform?"
"Is there no chance person who might identify you in the street?" said I.
"Well," he returned, "there ain't many. Nor yet I don't intend to advertisemyself in the newspapers by the name of A.M. come back from Botany Bay; andyears have rolled away, and who's to gain by it? Still, look'ee here, Pip. Ifthe danger had been fifty times as great, I should ha' come to see you, mindyou, just the same."
"And how long do you remain?"
"How long?" said he, taking his black pipe from his mouth, and dropping his jawas he stared at me. "I'm not a-going back. I've come for good."
"Where are you to live?" said I. "What is to be done with you? Where will yoube safe?"
"Dear boy," he returned, "there's disguising wigs can be bought for money, andthere's hair powder, and spectacles, and black clothes,—shorts and what not.Others has done it safe afore, and what others has done afore, others can doagen. As to the where and how of living, dear boy, give me your own opinions onit."
"You take it smoothly now," said I, "but you were very serious last night, whenyou swore it was Death."
"And so I swear it is Death," said he, putting his pipe back in his mouth, "andDeath by the rope, in the open street not fur from this, and it's serious thatyou should fully understand it to be so. What then, when that's once done? HereI am. To go back now 'ud be as bad as to stand ground—worse. Besides, Pip, I'mhere, because I've meant it by you, years and years. As to what I dare, I'm aold bird now, as has dared all manner of traps since first he was fledged, andI'm not afeerd to perch upon a scarecrow. If there's Death hid inside of it,there is, and let him come out, and I'll face him, and then I'll believe in himand not afore. And now let me have a look at my gentleman agen."
Once more, he took me by both hands and surveyed me with an air of admiringproprietorship: smoking with great complacency all the while.
It appeared to me that I could do no better than secure him some quiet lodginghard by, of which he might take possession when Herbert returned: whom Iexpected in two or three days. That the secret must be confided to Herbert as amatter of unavoidable necessity, even if I could have put the immense relief Ishould derive from sharing it with him out of the question, was plain to me.But it was by no means so plain to Mr. Provis (I resolved to call him by thatname), who reserved his consent to Herbert's participation until he should haveseen him and formed a favourable judgment of his physiognomy. "And even then,dear boy," said he, pulling a greasy little clasped black Testament out of hispocket, "we'll have him on his oath."
To state that my terrible patron carried this little black book about the worldsolely to swear people on in cases of emergency, would be to state what I neverquite established; but this I can say, that I never knew him put it to anyother use. The book itself had the appearance of having been stolen from somecourt of justice, and perhaps his knowledge of its antecedents, combined withhis own experience in that wise, gave him a reliance on its powers as a sort oflegal spell or charm. On this first occasion of his producing it, I recalledhow he had made me swear fidelity in the churchyard long ago, and how he haddescribed himself last night as always swearing to his resolutions in hissolitude.
As he was at present dressed in a seafaring slop suit, in which he looked as ifhe had some parrots and cigars to dispose of, I next discussed with him whatdress he should wear. He cherished an extraordinary belief in the virtues of"shorts" as a disguise, and had in his own mind sketched a dress for himselfthat would have made him something between a dean and a dentist. It was withconsiderable difficulty that I won him over to the assumption of a dress morelike a prosperous farmer's; and we arranged that he should cut his hair close,and wear a little powder. Lastly, as he had not yet been seen by the laundressor her niece, he was to keep himself out of their view until his change ofdress was made.
It would seem a simple matter to decide on these precautions; but in my dazed,not to say distracted, state, it took so long, that I did not get out tofurther them until two or three in the afternoon. He was to remain shut up inthe chambers while I was gone, and was on no account to open the door.
There being to my knowledge a respectable lodging-house in Essex Street, theback of which looked into the Temple, and was almost within hail of my windows,I first of all repaired to that house, and was so fortunate as to secure thesecond floor for my uncle, Mr. Provis. I then went from shop to shop, makingsuch purchases as were necessary to the change in his appearance. This businesstransacted, I turned my face, on my own account, to Little Britain. Mr. Jaggerswas at his desk, but, seeing me enter, got up immediately and stood before hisfire.
"Now, Pip," said he, "be careful."
"I will, sir," I returned. For, coming along I had thought well of what I wasgoing to say.
"Don't commit yourself," said Mr. Jaggers, "and don't commit any one. Youunderstand—any one. Don't tell me anything: I don't want to know anything; I amnot curious."
Of course I saw that he knew the man was come.
"I merely want, Mr. Jaggers," said I, "to assure myself that what I have beentold is true. I have no hope of its being untrue, but at least I may verifyit."
Mr. Jaggers nodded. "But did you say ‘told' or ‘informed'?" he asked me, withhis head on one side, and not looking at me, but looking in a listening way atthe floor. "Told would seem to imply verbal communication. You can't haveverbal communication with a man in New South Wales, you know."
"I will say, informed, Mr. Jaggers."
"Good."
"I have been informed by a person named Abel Magwitch, that he is thebenefactor so long unknown to me."
"That is the man," said Mr. Jaggers, "in New South Wales."
"And only he?" said I.
"And only he," said Mr. Jaggers.
"I am not so unreasonable, sir, as to think you at all responsible for mymistakes and wrong conclusions; but I always supposed it was Miss Havisham."
"As you say, Pip," returned Mr. Jaggers, turning his eyes upon me coolly, andtaking a bite at his forefinger, "I am not at all responsible for that."
"And yet it looked so like it, sir," I pleaded with a downcast heart.
"Not a particle of evidence, Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, shaking his head andgathering up his skirts. "Take nothing on its looks; take everything onevidence. There's no better rule."
"I have no more to say," said I, with a sigh, after standing silent for alittle while. "I have verified my information, and there's an end."
"And Magwitch—in New South Wales—having at last disclosed himself," said Mr.Jaggers, "you will comprehend, Pip, how rigidly throughout my communicationwith you, I have always adhered to the strict line of fact. There has neverbeen the least departure from the strict line of fact. You are quite aware ofthat?"
"Quite, sir."
"I communicated to Magwitch—in New South Wales—when he first wrote to me—fromNew South Wales—the caution that he must not expect me ever to deviate from thestrict line of fact. I also communicated to him another caution. He appeared tome to have obscurely hinted in his letter at some distant idea he had of seeingyou in England here. I cautioned him that I must hear no more of that; that hewas not at all likely to obtain a pardon; that he was expatriated for the termof his natural life; and that his presenting himself in this country would bean act of felony, rendering him liable to the extreme penalty of the law. Igave Magwitch that caution," said Mr. Jaggers, looking hard at me; "I wrote itto New South Wales. He guided himself by it, no doubt."
"No doubt," said I.
"I have been informed by Wemmick," pursued Mr. Jaggers, still looking hard atme, "that he has received a letter, under date Portsmouth, from a colonist ofthe name of Purvis, or—"
"Or Provis," I suggested.
"Or Provis—thank you, Pip. Perhaps it is Provis? Perhaps you know it'sProvis?"
"Yes," said I.
"You know it's Provis. A letter, under date Portsmouth, from a colonist of thename of Provis, asking for the particulars of your address, on behalf ofMagwitch. Wemmick sent him the particulars, I understand, by return of post.Probably it is through Provis that you have received the explanation ofMagwitch—in New South Wales?"
"It came through Provis," I replied.
"Good day, Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, offering his hand; "glad to have seen you.In writing by post to Magwitch—in New South Wales—or in communicating with himthrough Provis, have the goodness to mention that the particulars and vouchersof our long account shall be sent to you, together with the balance; for thereis still a balance remaining. Good-day, Pip!"
We shook hands, and he looked hard at me as long as he could see me. I turnedat the door, and he was still looking hard at me, while the two vile casts onthe shelf seemed to be trying to get their eyelids open, and to force out oftheir swollen throats, "O, what a man he is!"
Wemmick was out, and though he had been at his desk he could have done nothingfor me. I went straight back to the Temple, where I found the terrible Provisdrinking rum and water and smoking negro-head, in safety.
Next day the clothes I had ordered all came home, and he put them on. Whateverhe put on, became him less (it dismally seemed to me) than what he had wornbefore. To my thinking, there was something in him that made it hopeless toattempt to disguise him. The more I dressed him and the better I dressed him,the more he looked like the slouching fugitive on the marshes. This effect onmy anxious fancy was partly referable, no doubt, to his old face and mannergrowing more familiar to me; but I believe too that he dragged one of his legsas if there were still a weight of iron on it, and that from head to foot therewas Convict in the very grain of the man.
The influences of his solitary hut-life were upon him besides, and gave him asavage air that no dress could tame; added to these were the influences of hissubsequent branded life among men, and, crowning all, his consciousness that hewas dodging and hiding now. In all his ways of sitting and standing, and eatingand drinking,—of brooding about in a high-shouldered reluctant style,—of takingout his great horn-handled jackknife and wiping it on his legs and cutting hisfood,—of lifting light glasses and cups to his lips, as if they were clumsypannikins,—of chopping a wedge off his bread, and soaking up with it the lastfragments of gravy round and round his plate, as if to make the most of anallowance, and then drying his finger-ends on it, and then swallowing it,—inthese ways and a thousand other small nameless instances arising every minutein the day, there was Prisoner, Felon, Bondsman, plain as plain could be.
It had been his own idea to wear that touch of powder, and I had conceded thepowder after overcoming the shorts. But I can compare the effect of it, whenon, to nothing but the probable effect of rouge upon the dead; so awful was themanner in which everything in him that it was most desirable to repress,started through that thin layer of pretence, and seemed to come blazing out atthe crown of his head. It was abandoned as soon as tried, and he wore hisgrizzled hair cut short.
Words cannot tell what a sense I had, at the same time, of the dreadful mysterythat he was to me. When he fell asleep of an evening, with his knotted handsclenching the sides of the easy-chair, and his bald head tattooed with deepwrinkles falling forward on his breast, I would sit and look at him, wonderingwhat he had done, and loading him with all the crimes in the Calendar, untilthe impulse was powerful on me to start up and fly from him. Every hour soincreased my abhorrence of him, that I even think I might have yielded to thisimpulse in the first agonies of being so haunted, notwithstanding all he haddone for me and the risk he ran, but for the knowledge that Herbert must sooncome back. Once, I actually did start out of bed in the night, and begin todress myself in my worst clothes, hurriedly intending to leave him there witheverything else I possessed, and enlist for India as a private soldier.
I doubt if a ghost could have been more terrible to me, up in those lonelyrooms in the long evenings and long nights, with the wind and the rain alwaysrushing by. A ghost could not have been taken and hanged on my account, and theconsideration that he could be, and the dread that he would be, were no smalladdition to my horrors. When he was not asleep, or playing a complicated kindof Patience with a ragged pack of cards of his own,—a game that I never sawbefore or since, and in which he recorded his winnings by sticking hisjackknife into the table,—when he was not engaged in either of these pursuits,he would ask me to read to him,—"Foreign language, dear boy!" While I complied,he, not comprehending a single word, would stand before the fire surveying mewith the air of an Exhibitor, and I would see him, between the fingers of thehand with which I shaded my face, appealing in dumb show to the furniture totake notice of my proficiency. The imaginary student pursued by the misshapencreature he had impiously made, was not more wretched than I, pursued by thecreature who had made me, and recoiling from him with a stronger repulsion, themore he admired me and the fonder he was of me.
This is written of, I am sensible, as if it had lasted a year. It lasted aboutfive days. Expecting Herbert all the time, I dared not go out, except when Itook Provis for an airing after dark. At length, one evening when dinner wasover and I had dropped into a slumber quite worn out,—for my nights had beenagitated and my rest broken by fearful dreams,—I was roused by the welcomefootstep on the staircase. Provis, who had been asleep too, staggered up at thenoise I made, and in an instant I saw his jackknife shining in his hand.
"Quiet! It's Herbert!" I said; and Herbert came bursting in, with the airyfreshness of six hundred miles of France upon him.
"Handel, my dear fellow, how are you, and again how are you, and again how areyou? I seem to have been gone a twelvemonth! Why, so I must have been, for youhave grown quite thin and pale! Handel, my—Halloa! I beg your pardon."
He was stopped in his running on and in his shaking hands with me, by seeingProvis. Provis, regarding him with a fixed attention, was slowly putting up hisjackknife, and groping in another pocket for something else.
"Herbert, my dear friend," said I, shutting the double doors, while Herbertstood staring and wondering, "something very strange has happened. This is—avisitor of mine."
"It's all right, dear boy!" said Provis coming forward, with his little claspedblack book, and then addressing himself to Herbert. "Take it in your righthand. Lord strike you dead on the spot, if ever you split in any way sumever!Kiss it!"
"Do so, as he wishes it," I said to Herbert. So, Herbert, looking at me with afriendly uneasiness and amazement, complied, and Provis immediately shakinghands with him, said, "Now you're on your oath, you know. And never believe meon mine, if Pip shan't make a gentleman on you!"
