
Chapter XLI.
Invain should I attempt to describe the astonishment and disquiet of Herbert,when he and I and Provis sat down before the fire, and I recounted the whole ofthe secret. Enough, that I saw my own feelings reflected in Herbert's face, andnot least among them, my repugnance towards the man who had done so much forme.
What would alone have set a division between that man and us, if there had beenno other dividing circumstance, was his triumph in my story. Saving histroublesome sense of having been "low" on one occasion since his return,—onwhich point he began to hold forth to Herbert, the moment my revelation wasfinished,—he had no perception of the possibility of my finding any fault withmy good fortune. His boast that he had made me a gentleman, and that he hadcome to see me support the character on his ample resources, was made for mequite as much as for himself. And that it was a highly agreeable boast to bothof us, and that we must both be very proud of it, was a conclusion quiteestablished in his own mind.
"Though, look'ee here, Pip's comrade," he said to Herbert, after havingdiscoursed for some time, "I know very well that once since I come back—forhalf a minute—I've been low. I said to Pip, I knowed as I had been low. Butdon't you fret yourself on that score. I ain't made Pip a gentleman, and Pipain't a-going to make you a gentleman, not fur me not to know what's due to yeboth. Dear boy, and Pip's comrade, you two may count upon me always having agenteel muzzle on. Muzzled I have been since that half a minute when I wasbetrayed into lowness, muzzled I am at the present time, muzzled I ever willbe."
Herbert said, "Certainly," but looked as if there were no specific consolationin this, and remained perplexed and dismayed. We were anxious for the time whenhe would go to his lodging and leave us together, but he was evidently jealousof leaving us together, and sat late. It was midnight before I took him roundto Essex Street, and saw him safely in at his own dark door. When it closedupon him, I experienced the first moment of relief I had known since the nightof his arrival.
Never quite free from an uneasy remembrance of the man on the stairs, I hadalways looked about me in taking my guest out after dark, and in bringing himback; and I looked about me now. Difficult as it is in a large city to avoidthe suspicion of being watched, when the mind is conscious of danger in thatregard, I could not persuade myself that any of the people within sight caredabout my movements. The few who were passing passed on their several ways, andthe street was empty when I turned back into the Temple. Nobody had come out atthe gate with us, nobody went in at the gate with me. As I crossed by thefountain, I saw his lighted back windows looking bright and quiet, and, when Istood for a few moments in the doorway of the building where I lived, beforegoing up the stairs, Garden Court was as still and lifeless as the staircasewas when I ascended it.
Herbert received me with open arms, and I had never felt before so blessedlywhat it is to have a friend. When he had spoken some sound words of sympathyand encouragement, we sat down to consider the question, What was to be done?
The chair that Provis had occupied still remaining where it had stood,—for hehad a barrack way with him of hanging about one spot, in one unsettled manner,and going through one round of observances with his pipe and his negro-head andhis jackknife and his pack of cards, and what not, as if it were all put downfor him on a slate,—I say his chair remaining where it had stood, Herbertunconsciously took it, but next moment started out of it, pushed it away, andtook another. He had no occasion to say after that that he had conceived anaversion for my patron, neither had I occasion to confess my own. Weinterchanged that confidence without shaping a syllable.
"What," said I to Herbert, when he was safe in another chair,—"what is to bedone?"
"My poor dear Handel," he replied, holding his head, "I am too stunned tothink."
"So was I, Herbert, when the blow first fell. Still, something must be done. Heis intent upon various new expenses,—horses, and carriages, and lavishappearances of all kinds. He must be stopped somehow."
"You mean that you can't accept—"
"How can I?" I interposed, as Herbert paused. "Think of him! Look at him!"
An involuntary shudder passed over both of us.
"Yet I am afraid the dreadful truth is, Herbert, that he is attached to me,strongly attached to me. Was there ever such a fate!"
"My poor dear Handel," Herbert repeated.
"Then," said I, "after all, stopping short here, never taking another pennyfrom him, think what I owe him already! Then again: I am heavily in debt,—veryheavily for me, who have now no expectations,—and I have been bred to nocalling, and I am fit for nothing."
"Well, well, well!" Herbert remonstrated. "Don't say fit for nothing."
"What am I fit for? I know only one thing that I am fit for, and that is, to gofor a soldier. And I might have gone, my dear Herbert, but for the prospect oftaking counsel with your friendship and affection."
Of course I broke down there: and of course Herbert, beyond seizing a warm gripof my hand, pretended not to know it.
"Anyhow, my dear Handel," said he presently, "soldiering won't do. If you wereto renounce this patronage and these favours, I suppose you would do so withsome faint hope of one day repaying what you have already had. Not very strong,that hope, if you went soldiering! Besides, it's absurd. You would beinfinitely better in Clarriker's house, small as it is. I am working up towardsa partnership, you know."
Poor fellow! He little suspected with whose money.
"But there is another question," said Herbert. "This is an ignorant, determinedman, who has long had one fixed idea. More than that, he seems to me (I maymisjudge him) to be a man of a desperate and fierce character."
"I know he is," I returned. "Let me tell you what evidence I have seen of it."And I told him what I had not mentioned in my narrative, of that encounter withthe other convict.
"See, then," said Herbert; "think of this! He comes here at the peril of hislife, for the realisation of his fixed idea. In the moment of realisation,after all his toil and waiting, you cut the ground from under his feet, destroyhis idea, and make his gains worthless to him. Do you see nothing that he mightdo, under the disappointment?"
"I have seen it, Herbert, and dreamed of it, ever since the fatal night of hisarrival. Nothing has been in my thoughts so distinctly as his putting himselfin the way of being taken."
"Then you may rely upon it," said Herbert, "that there would be great danger ofhis doing it. That is his power over you as long as he remains in England, andthat would be his reckless course if you forsook him."
I was so struck by the horror of this idea, which had weighed upon me from thefirst, and the working out of which would make me regard myself, in some sort,as his murderer, that I could not rest in my chair, but began pacing to andfro. I said to Herbert, meanwhile, that even if Provis were recognised andtaken, in spite of himself, I should be wretched as the cause, howeverinnocently. Yes; even though I was so wretched in having him at large and nearme, and even though I would far rather have worked at the forge all the days ofmy life than I would ever have come to this!
But there was no staving off the question, What was to be done?
"The first and the main thing to be done," said Herbert, "is to get him out ofEngland. You will have to go with him, and then he may be induced to go."
"But get him where I will, could I prevent his coming back?"
"My good Handel, is it not obvious that with Newgate in the next street, theremust be far greater hazard in your breaking your mind to him and making himreckless, here, than elsewhere? If a pretext to get him away could be made outof that other convict, or out of anything else in his life, now."
"There, again!" said I, stopping before Herbert, with my open hands held out,as if they contained the desperation of the case. "I know nothing of his life.It has almost made me mad to sit here of a night and see him before me, sobound up with my fortunes and misfortunes, and yet so unknown to me, except asthe miserable wretch who terrified me two days in my childhood!"
Herbert got up, and linked his arm in mine, and we slowly walked to and frotogether, studying the carpet.
"Handel," said Herbert, stopping, "you feel convinced that you can take nofurther benefits from him; do you?"
"Fully. Surely you would, too, if you were in my place?"
"And you feel convinced that you must break with him?"
"Herbert, can you ask me?"
"And you have, and are bound to have, that tenderness for the life he hasrisked on your account, that you must save him, if possible, from throwing itaway. Then you must get him out of England before you stir a finger toextricate yourself. That done, extricate yourself, in Heaven's name, and we'llsee it out together, dear old boy."
It was a comfort to shake hands upon it, and walk up and down again, with onlythat done.
"Now, Herbert," said I, "with reference to gaining some knowledge of hishistory. There is but one way that I know of. I must ask him point blank."
"Yes. Ask him," said Herbert, "when we sit at breakfast in the morning." For hehad said, on taking leave of Herbert, that he would come to breakfast with us.
With this project formed, we went to bed. I had the wildest dreams concerninghim, and woke unrefreshed; I woke, too, to recover the fear which I had lost inthe night, of his being found out as a returned transport. Waking, I never lostthat fear.
He came round at the appointed time, took out his jackknife, and sat down tohis meal. He was full of plans "for his gentleman's coming out strong, and likea gentleman," and urged me to begin speedily upon the pocket-book which he hadleft in my possession. He considered the chambers and his own lodging astemporary residences, and advised me to look out at once for a "fashionablecrib" near Hyde Park, in which he could have "a shake-down." When he had madean end of his breakfast, and was wiping his knife on his leg, I said to him,without a word of preface,—
"After you were gone last night, I told my friend of the struggle that thesoldiers found you engaged in on the marshes, when we came up. You remember?"
"Remember!" said he. "I think so!"
"We want to know something about that man—and about you. It is strange to knowno more about either, and particularly you, than I was able to tell last night.Is not this as good a time as another for our knowing more?"
"Well!" he said, after consideration. "You're on your oath, you know, Pip'scomrade?"
"Assuredly," replied Herbert.
"As to anything I say, you know," he insisted. "The oath applies to all."
"I understand it to do so."
"And look'ee here! Wotever I done is worked out and paid for," he insistedagain.
"So be it."
He took out his black pipe and was going to fill it with negro-head, when,looking at the tangle of tobacco in his hand, he seemed to think it mightperplex the thread of his narrative. He put it back again, stuck his pipe in abutton-hole of his coat, spread a hand on each knee, and after turning an angryeye on the fire for a few silent moments, looked round at us and said whatfollows.
