
Chapter XLII.
"Dear boy and Pip's comrade. I am not a-going fur to tell you my life like asong, or a story-book. But to give it you short and handy, I'll put it at onceinto a mouthful of English. In jail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail,in jail and out of jail. There, you've got it. That's my life prettymuch, down to such times as I got shipped off, arter Pip stood my friend.
"I've been done everything to, pretty well—except hanged. I've been locked upas much as a silver tea-kittle. I've been carted here and carted there, and putout of this town, and put out of that town, and stuck in the stocks, andwhipped and worried and drove. I've no more notion where I was born than youhave—if so much. I first become aware of myself down in Essex, a thievingturnips for my living. Summun had run away from me—a man—a tinker—and he'd tookthe fire with him, and left me wery cold.
"I know'd my name to be Magwitch, chrisen'd Abel. How did I know it? Much as Iknow'd the birds' names in the hedges to be chaffinch, sparrer, thrush. I mighthave thought it was all lies together, only as the birds' names come out true,I supposed mine did.
"So fur as I could find, there warn't a soul that see young Abel Magwitch, withus little on him as in him, but wot caught fright at him, and either drove himoff, or took him up. I was took up, took up, took up, to that extent that Ireg'larly grow'd up took up.
"This is the way it was, that when I was a ragged little creetur as much to bepitied as ever I see (not that I looked in the glass, for there warn't manyinsides of furnished houses known to me), I got the name of being hardened.‘This is a terrible hardened one,' they says to prison wisitors, picking outme. ‘May be said to live in jails, this boy.' Then they looked at me, and Ilooked at them, and they measured my head, some on 'em,—they had better ameasured my stomach,—and others on 'em giv me tracts what I couldn't read, andmade me speeches what I couldn't understand. They always went on agen me aboutthe Devil. But what the Devil was I to do? I must put something into mystomach, mustn't I?—Howsomever, I'm a getting low, and I know what's due. Dearboy and Pip's comrade, don't you be afeerd of me being low.
"Tramping, begging, thieving, working sometimes when I could,—though thatwarn't as often as you may think, till you put the question whether you wouldha' been over-ready to give me work yourselves,—a bit of a poacher, a bit of alabourer, a bit of a wagoner, a bit of a haymaker, a bit of a hawker, a bit ofmost things that don't pay and lead to trouble, I got to be a man. A desertingsoldier in a Traveller's Rest, what lay hid up to the chin under a lot oftaturs, learnt me to read; and a travelling Giant what signed his name at apenny a time learnt me to write. I warn't locked up as often now as formerly,but I wore out my good share of key-metal still.
"At Epsom races, a matter of over twenty years ago, I got acquainted wi' a manwhose skull I'd crack wi' this poker, like the claw of a lobster, if I'd got iton this hob. His right name was Compeyson; and that's the man, dear boy, whatyou see me a pounding in the ditch, according to what you truly told yourcomrade arter I was gone last night.
"He set up fur a gentleman, this Compeyson, and he'd been to a publicboarding-school and had learning. He was a smooth one to talk, and was a dab atthe ways of gentlefolks. He was good-looking too. It was the night afore thegreat race, when I found him on the heath, in a booth that I know'd on. Him andsome more was a sitting among the tables when I went in, and the landlord(which had a knowledge of me, and was a sporting one) called him out, and said,‘I think this is a man that might suit you,'—meaning I was.
"Compeyson, he looks at me very noticing, and I look at him. He has a watch anda chain and a ring and a breast-pin and a handsome suit of clothes.
"‘To judge from appearances, you're out of luck,' says Compeyson to me.
"‘Yes, master, and I've never been in it much.' (I had come out of KingstonJail last on a vagrancy committal. Not but what it might have been forsomething else; but it warn't.)
"‘Luck changes,' says Compeyson; ‘perhaps yours is going to change.'
"I says, ‘I hope it may be so. There's room.'
"‘What can you do?' says Compeyson.
"‘Eat and drink,' I says; ‘if you'll find the materials.'
"Compeyson laughed, looked at me again very noticing, giv me five shillings,and appointed me for next night. Same place.
"I went to Compeyson next night, same place, and Compeyson took me on to be hisman and pardner. And what was Compeyson's business in which we was to gopardners? Compeyson's business was the swindling, handwriting forging, stolenbank-note passing, and such-like. All sorts of traps as Compeyson could setwith his head, and keep his own legs out of and get the profits from and letanother man in for, was Compeyson's business. He'd no more heart than a ironfile, he was as cold as death, and he had the head of the Devil aforementioned.
"There was another in with Compeyson, as was called Arthur,—not as being sochrisen'd, but as a surname. He was in a Decline, and was a shadow to look at.Him and Compeyson had been in a bad thing with a rich lady some years afore,and they'd made a pot of money by it; but Compeyson betted and gamed, and he'dhave run through the king's taxes. So, Arthur was a dying, and a dying poor andwith the horrors on him, and Compeyson's wife (which Compeyson kicked mostly)was a having pity on him when she could, and Compeyson was a having pity onnothing and nobody.
"I might a took warning by Arthur, but I didn't; and I won't pretend I waspartick'ler—for where 'ud be the good on it, dear boy and comrade? So I begunwi' Compeyson, and a poor tool I was in his hands. Arthur lived at the top ofCompeyson's house (over nigh Brentford it was), and Compeyson kept a carefulaccount agen him for board and lodging, in case he should ever get better towork it out. But Arthur soon settled the account. The second or third time asever I see him, he come a tearing down into Compeyson's parlour late at night,in only a flannel gown, with his hair all in a sweat, and he says toCompeyson's wife, ‘Sally, she really is upstairs alonger me, now, and I can'tget rid of her. She's all in white,' he says, ‘wi' white flowers in her hair,and she's awful mad, and she's got a shroud hanging over her arm, and she saysshe'll put it on me at five in the morning.'
"Says Compeyson: ‘Why, you fool, don't you know she's got a living body? Andhow should she be up there, without coming through the door, or in at thewindow, and up the stairs?'
"‘I don't know how she's there,' says Arthur, shivering dreadful with thehorrors, ‘but she's standing in the corner at the foot of the bed, awful mad.And over where her heart's broke—you broke it!—there's drops of blood.'
"Compeyson spoke hardy, but he was always a coward. ‘Go up alonger thisdrivelling sick man,' he says to his wife, ‘and Magwitch, lend her a hand, willyou?' But he never come nigh himself.
"Compeyson's wife and me took him up to bed agen, and he raved most dreadful.‘Why look at her!' he cries out. ‘She's a shaking the shroud at me! Don't yousee her? Look at her eyes! Ain't it awful to see her so mad?' Next he cries,‘She'll put it on me, and then I'm done for! Take it away from her, take itaway!' And then he catched hold of us, and kep on a talking to her, andanswering of her, till I half believed I see her myself.
"Compeyson's wife, being used to him, giv him some liquor to get the horrorsoff, and by and by he quieted. ‘O, she's gone! Has her keeper been for her?' hesays. ‘Yes,' says Compeyson's wife. ‘Did you tell him to lock her and bar herin?' ‘Yes.' ‘And to take that ugly thing away from her?' ‘Yes, yes, all right.'‘You're a good creetur,' he says, ‘don't leave me, whatever you do, and thankyou!'
"He rested pretty quiet till it might want a few minutes of five, and then hestarts up with a scream, and screams out, ‘Here she is! She's got the shroudagain. She's unfolding it. She's coming out of the corner. She's coming to thebed. Hold me, both on you—one of each side—don't let her touch me with it. Hah!she missed me that time. Don't let her throw it over my shoulders. Don't lether lift me up to get it round me. She's lifting me up. Keep me down!' Then helifted himself up hard, and was dead.
"Compeyson took it easy as a good riddance for both sides. Him and me was soonbusy, and first he swore me (being ever artful) on my own book,—this herelittle black book, dear boy, what I swore your comrade on.
"Not to go into the things that Compeyson planned, and I done—which 'ud take aweek—I'll simply say to you, dear boy, and Pip's comrade, that that man got meinto such nets as made me his black slave. I was always in debt to him, alwaysunder his thumb, always a working, always a getting into danger. He was youngerthan me, but he'd got craft, and he'd got learning, and he overmatched me fivehundred times told and no mercy. My Missis as I had the hard time wi'—Stopthough! I ain't brought her in—"
He looked about him in a confused way, as if he had lost his place in the bookof his remembrance; and he turned his face to the fire, and spread his handsbroader on his knees, and lifted them off and put them on again.
"There ain't no need to go into it," he said, looking round once more. "Thetime wi' Compeyson was a'most as hard a time as ever I had; that said, all'ssaid. Did I tell you as I was tried, alone, for misdemeanor, while withCompeyson?"
I answered, No.
"Well!" he said, "I was, and got convicted. As to took up on suspicion,that was twice or three times in the four or five year that it lasted; butevidence was wanting. At last, me and Compeyson was both committed forfelony,—on a charge of putting stolen notes in circulation,—and there was othercharges behind. Compeyson says to me, ‘Separate defences, no communication,'and that was all. And I was so miserable poor, that I sold all the clothes Ihad, except what hung on my back, afore I could get Jaggers.
"When we was put in the dock, I noticed first of all what a gentleman Compeysonlooked, wi' his curly hair and his black clothes and his whitepocket-handkercher, and what a common sort of a wretch I looked. When theprosecution opened and the evidence was put short, aforehand, I noticed howheavy it all bore on me, and how light on him. When the evidence was giv in thebox, I noticed how it was always me that had come for'ard, and could be sworeto, how it was always me that the money had been paid to, how it was always methat had seemed to work the thing and get the profit. But when the defence comeon, then I see the plan plainer; for, says the counsellor for Compeyson, ‘Mylord and gentlemen, here you has afore you, side by side, two persons as youreyes can separate wide; one, the younger, well brought up, who will be spoke toas such; one, the elder, ill brought up, who will be spoke to as such; one, theyounger, seldom if ever seen in these here transactions, and only suspected;t'other, the elder, always seen in 'em and always wi' his guilt brought home.Can you doubt, if there is but one in it, which is the one, and, if there istwo in it, which is much the worst one?' And such-like. And when it come tocharacter, warn't it Compeyson as had been to the school, and warn't it hisschoolfellows as was in this position and in that, and warn't it him as hadbeen know'd by witnesses in such clubs and societies, and nowt to hisdisadvantage? And warn't it me as had been tried afore, and as had been know'dup hill and down dale in Bridewells and Lock-Ups! And when it come tospeech-making, warn't it Compeyson as could speak to 'em wi' his face droppingevery now and then into his white pocket-handkercher,—ah! and wi' verses in hisspeech, too,—and warn't it me as could only say, ‘Gentlemen, this man at myside is a most precious rascal'? And when the verdict come, warn't it Compeysonas was recommended to mercy on account of good character and bad company, andgiving up all the information he could agen me, and warn't it me as got never aword but Guilty? And when I says to Compeyson, ‘Once out of this court, I'llsmash that face of yourn!' ain't it Compeyson as prays the Judge to beprotected, and gets two turnkeys stood betwixt us? And when we're sentenced,ain't it him as gets seven year, and me fourteen, and ain't it him as the Judgeis sorry for, because he might a done so well, and ain't it me as the Judgeperceives to be a old offender of wiolent passion, likely to come to worse?"
He had worked himself into a state of great excitement, but he checked it, tooktwo or three short breaths, swallowed as often, and stretching out his handtowards me said, in a reassuring manner, "I ain't a-going to be low, dear boy!"
He had so heated himself that he took out his handkerchief and wiped his faceand head and neck and hands, before he could go on.




"I had said to Compeyson that I'd smash that face of his, and I swore Lordsmash mine! to do it. We was in the same prison-ship, but I couldn't get at himfor long, though I tried. At last I come behind him and hit him on the cheek toturn him round and get a smashing one at him, when I was seen and seized. Theblack-hole of that ship warn't a strong one, to a judge of black-holes thatcould swim and dive. I escaped to the shore, and I was a hiding among thegraves there, envying them as was in 'em and all over, when I first see myboy!"
He regarded me with a look of affection that made him almost abhorrent to meagain, though I had felt great pity for him.
"By my boy, I was giv to understand as Compeyson was out on them marshes too.Upon my soul, I half believe he escaped in his terror, to get quit of me, notknowing it was me as had got ashore. I hunted him down. I smashed his face.‘And now,' says I ‘as the worst thing I can do, caring nothing for myself, I'lldrag you back.' And I'd have swum off, towing him by the hair, if it had cometo that, and I'd a got him aboard without the soldiers.
"Of course he'd much the best of it to the last,—his character was so good. Hehad escaped when he was made half wild by me and my murderous intentions; andhis punishment was light. I was put in irons, brought to trial again, and sentfor life. I didn't stop for life, dear boy and Pip's comrade, being here."
He wiped himself again, as he had done before, and then slowly took his tangleof tobacco from his pocket, and plucked his pipe from his button-hole, andslowly filled it, and began to smoke.
"Is he dead?" I asked, after a silence.
"Is who dead, dear boy?"
"Compeyson."
"He hopes I am, if he's alive, you may be sure," with a fierce look. "Inever heerd no more of him."
Herbert had been writing with his pencil in the cover of a book. He softlypushed the book over to me, as Provis stood smoking with his eyes on the fire,and I read in it:—
"Young Havisham's name was Arthur. Compeyson is the man who professed to beMiss Havisham's lover."
I shut the book and nodded slightly to Herbert, and put the book by; but weneither of us said anything, and both looked at Provis as he stood smoking bythe fire.
