
Chapter XLIII.
Whyshould I pause to ask how much of my shrinking from Provis might be traced toEstella? Why should I loiter on my road, to compare the state of mind in whichI had tried to rid myself of the stain of the prison before meeting her at thecoach-office, with the state of mind in which I now reflected on the abyssbetween Estella in her pride and beauty, and the returned transport whom Iharboured? The road would be none the smoother for it, the end would be nonethe better for it, he would not be helped, nor I extenuated.
A new fear had been engendered in my mind by his narrative; or rather, hisnarrative had given form and purpose to the fear that was already there. IfCompeyson were alive and should discover his return, I could hardly doubt theconsequence. That Compeyson stood in mortal fear of him, neither of the twocould know much better than I; and that any such man as that man had beendescribed to be would hesitate to release himself for good from a dreaded enemyby the safe means of becoming an informer was scarcely to be imagined.
Never had I breathed, and never would I breathe—or so I resolved—a word ofEstella to Provis. But, I said to Herbert that, before I could go abroad, Imust see both Estella and Miss Havisham. This was when we were left alone onthe night of the day when Provis told us his story. I resolved to go out toRichmond next day, and I went.
On my presenting myself at Mrs. Brandley's, Estella's maid was called to tellthat Estella had gone into the country. Where? To Satis House, as usual. Not asusual, I said, for she had never yet gone there without me; when was she comingback? There was an air of reservation in the answer which increased myperplexity, and the answer was, that her maid believed she was only coming backat all for a little while. I could make nothing of this, except that it wasmeant that I should make nothing of it, and I went home again in completediscomfiture.
Another night consultation with Herbert after Provis was gone home (I alwaystook him home, and always looked well about me), led us to the conclusion thatnothing should be said about going abroad until I came back from MissHavisham's. In the mean time, Herbert and I were to consider separately what itwould be best to say; whether we should devise any pretence of being afraidthat he was under suspicious observation; or whether I, who had never yet beenabroad, should propose an expedition. We both knew that I had but to proposeanything, and he would consent. We agreed that his remaining many days in hispresent hazard was not to be thought of.
Next day I had the meanness to feign that I was under a binding promise to godown to Joe; but I was capable of almost any meanness towards Joe or his name.Provis was to be strictly careful while I was gone, and Herbert was to take thecharge of him that I had taken. I was to be absent only one night, and, on myreturn, the gratification of his impatience for my starting as a gentleman on agreater scale was to be begun. It occurred to me then, and as I afterwardsfound to Herbert also, that he might be best got away across the water, on thatpretence,—as, to make purchases, or the like.
Having thus cleared the way for my expedition to Miss Havisham's, I set off bythe early morning coach before it was yet light, and was out on the opencountry road when the day came creeping on, halting and whimpering andshivering, and wrapped in patches of cloud and rags of mist, like a beggar.When we drove up to the Blue Boar after a drizzly ride, whom should I see comeout under the gateway, toothpick in hand, to look at the coach, but BentleyDrummle!
As he pretended not to see me, I pretended not to see him. It was a very lamepretence on both sides; the lamer, because we both went into the coffee-room,where he had just finished his breakfast, and where I ordered mine. It waspoisonous to me to see him in the town, for I very well knew why he had comethere.
Pretending to read a smeary newspaper long out of date, which had nothing halfso legible in its local news, as the foreign matter of coffee, pickles, fishsauces, gravy, melted butter, and wine with which it was sprinkled all over, asif it had taken the measles in a highly irregular form, I sat at my table whilehe stood before the fire. By degrees it became an enormous injury to me that hestood before the fire. And I got up, determined to have my share of it. I hadto put my hand behind his legs for the poker when I went up to the fireplace tostir the fire, but still pretended not to know him.
"Is this a cut?" said Mr. Drummle.
"Oh!" said I, poker in hand; "it's you, is it? How do you do? I was wonderingwho it was, who kept the fire off."
With that, I poked tremendously, and having done so, planted myself side byside with Mr. Drummle, my shoulders squared and my back to the fire.
"You have just come down?" said Mr. Drummle, edging me a little away with hisshoulder.
"Yes," said I, edging him a little away with my shoulder.
"Beastly place," said Drummle. "Your part of the country, I think?"
"Yes," I assented. "I am told it's very like your Shropshire."
"Not in the least like it," said Drummle.
Here Mr. Drummle looked at his boots and I looked at mine, and then Mr. Drummlelooked at my boots, and I looked at his.
"Have you been here long?" I asked, determined not to yield an inch of thefire.
"Long enough to be tired of it," returned Drummle, pretending to yawn, butequally determined.
"Do you stay here long?"
"Can't say," answered Mr. Drummle. "Do you?"
"Can't say," said I.
I felt here, through a tingling in my blood, that if Mr. Drummle's shoulder hadclaimed another hair's breadth of room, I should have jerked him into thewindow; equally, that if my own shoulder had urged a similar claim, Mr. Drummlewould have jerked me into the nearest box. He whistled a little. So did I.
"Large tract of marshes about here, I believe?" said Drummle.
"Yes. What of that?" said I.
Mr. Drummle looked at me, and then at my boots, and then said, "Oh!" andlaughed.
"Are you amused, Mr. Drummle?"
"No," said he, "not particularly. I am going out for a ride in the saddle. Imean to explore those marshes for amusement. Out-of-the-way villages there,they tell me. Curious little public-houses—and smithies—and that. Waiter!"
"Yes, sir."
"Is that horse of mine ready?"
"Brought round to the door, sir."
"I say. Look here, you sir. The lady won't ride to-day; the weather won't do."
"Very good, sir."
"And I don't dine, because I'm going to dine at the lady's."
"Very good, sir."
Then, Drummle glanced at me, with an insolent triumph on his great-jowled facethat cut me to the heart, dull as he was, and so exasperated me, that I feltinclined to take him in my arms (as the robber in the story-book is said tohave taken the old lady) and seat him on the fire.
One thing was manifest to both of us, and that was, that until relief came,neither of us could relinquish the fire. There we stood, well squared up beforeit, shoulder to shoulder and foot to foot, with our hands behind us, notbudging an inch. The horse was visible outside in the drizzle at the door, mybreakfast was put on the table, Drummle's was cleared away, the waiter invitedme to begin, I nodded, we both stood our ground.
"Have you been to the Grove since?" said Drummle.
"No," said I, "I had quite enough of the Finches the last time I was there."
"Was that when we had a difference of opinion?"
"Yes," I replied, very shortly.
"Come, come! They let you off easily enough," sneered Drummle. "You shouldn'thave lost your temper."
"Mr. Drummle," said I, "you are not competent to give advice on that subject.When I lose my temper (not that I admit having done so on that occasion), Idon't throw glasses."
"I do," said Drummle.
After glancing at him once or twice, in an increased state of smoulderingferocity, I said,—
"Mr. Drummle, I did not seek this conversation, and I don't think it anagreeable one."
"I am sure it's not," said he, superciliously over his shoulder; "I don't thinkanything about it."
"And therefore," I went on, "with your leave, I will suggest that we hold nokind of communication in future."
"Quite my opinion," said Drummle, "and what I should have suggested myself, ordone—more likely—without suggesting. But don't lose your temper. Haven't youlost enough without that?"
"What do you mean, sir?"
"Waiter!" said Drummle, by way of answering me.
The waiter reappeared.
"Look here, you sir. You quite understand that the young lady don't rideto-day, and that I dine at the young lady's?"
"Quite so, sir!"
When the waiter had felt my fast-cooling teapot with the palm of his hand, andhad looked imploringly at me, and had gone out, Drummle, careful not to movethe shoulder next me, took a cigar from his pocket and bit the end off, butshowed no sign of stirring. Choking and boiling as I was, I felt that we couldnot go a word further, without introducing Estella's name, which I could notendure to hear him utter; and therefore I looked stonily at the opposite wall,as if there were no one present, and forced myself to silence. How long wemight have remained in this ridiculous position it is impossible to say, butfor the incursion of three thriving farmers—laid on by the waiter, I think—whocame into the coffee-room unbuttoning their great-coats and rubbing theirhands, and before whom, as they charged at the fire, we were obliged to giveway.
I saw him through the window, seizing his horse's mane, and mounting in hisblundering brutal manner, and sidling and backing away. I thought he was gone,when he came back, calling for a light for the cigar in his mouth, which he hadforgotten. A man in a dust-coloured dress appeared with what was wanted,—Icould not have said from where: whether from the inn yard, or the street, orwhere not,—and as Drummle leaned down from the saddle and lighted his cigar andlaughed, with a jerk of his head towards the coffee-room windows, the slouchingshoulders and ragged hair of this man whose back was towards me reminded me ofOrlick.
Too heavily out of sorts to care much at the time whether it were he or no, orafter all to touch the breakfast, I washed the weather and the journey from myface and hands, and went out to the memorable old house that it would have beenso much the better for me never to have entered, never to have seen.
