
Chapter XLIV.
In theroom where the dressing-table stood, and where the wax-candles burnt on thewall, I found Miss Havisham and Estella; Miss Havisham seated on a settee nearthe fire, and Estella on a cushion at her feet. Estella was knitting, and MissHavisham was looking on. They both raised their eyes as I went in, and both sawan alteration in me. I derived that, from the look they interchanged.
"And what wind," said Miss Havisham, "blows you here, Pip?"
Though she looked steadily at me, I saw that she was rather confused. Estella,pausing a moment in her knitting with her eyes upon me, and then going on, Ifancied that I read in the action of her fingers, as plainly as if she had toldme in the dumb alphabet, that she perceived I had discovered my realbenefactor.
"Miss Havisham," said I, "I went to Richmond yesterday, to speak to Estella;and finding that some wind had blown her here, I followed."
Miss Havisham motioning to me for the third or fourth time to sit down, I tookthe chair by the dressing-table, which I had often seen her occupy. With allthat ruin at my feet and about me, it seemed a natural place for me, that day.
"What I had to say to Estella, Miss Havisham, I will say before you,presently—in a few moments. It will not surprise you, it will not displeaseyou. I am as unhappy as you can ever have meant me to be."
Miss Havisham continued to look steadily at me. I could see in the action ofEstella's fingers as they worked that she attended to what I said; but she didnot look up.
"I have found out who my patron is. It is not a fortunate discovery, and is notlikely ever to enrich me in reputation, station, fortune, anything. There arereasons why I must say no more of that. It is not my secret, but another's."
As I was silent for a while, looking at Estella and considering how to go on,Miss Havisham repeated, "It is not your secret, but another's. Well?"
"When you first caused me to be brought here, Miss Havisham, when I belonged tothe village over yonder, that I wish I had never left, I suppose I did reallycome here, as any other chance boy might have come,—as a kind of servant, togratify a want or a whim, and to be paid for it?"
"Ay, Pip," replied Miss Havisham, steadily nodding her head; "you did."
"And that Mr. Jaggers—"
"Mr. Jaggers," said Miss Havisham, taking me up in a firm tone, "had nothing todo with it, and knew nothing of it. His being my lawyer, and his being thelawyer of your patron is a coincidence. He holds the same relation towardsnumbers of people, and it might easily arise. Be that as it may, it did arise,and was not brought about by any one."
Any one might have seen in her haggard face that there was no suppression orevasion so far.
"But when I fell into the mistake I have so long remained in, at least you ledme on?" said I.
"Yes," she returned, again nodding steadily, "I let you go on."
"Was that kind?"
"Who am I," cried Miss Havisham, striking her stick upon the floor and flashinginto wrath so suddenly that Estella glanced up at her in surprise,—"who am I,for God's sake, that I should be kind?"
It was a weak complaint to have made, and I had not meant to make it. I toldher so, as she sat brooding after this outburst.
"Well, well, well!" she said. "What else?"
"I was liberally paid for my old attendance here," I said, to soothe her, "inbeing apprenticed, and I have asked these questions only for my owninformation. What follows has another (and I hope more disinterested) purpose.In humouring my mistake, Miss Havisham, you punished—practised on—perhaps youwill supply whatever term expresses your intention, without offence—yourself-seeking relations?"
"I did. Why, they would have it so! So would you. What has been my history,that I should be at the pains of entreating either them or you not to have itso! You made your own snares. I never made them."
Waiting until she was quiet again,—for this, too, flashed out of her in a wildand sudden way,—I went on.
"I have been thrown among one family of your relations, Miss Havisham, and havebeen constantly among them since I went to London. I know them to have been ashonestly under my delusion as I myself. And I should be false and base if I didnot tell you, whether it is acceptable to you or no, and whether you areinclined to give credence to it or no, that you deeply wrong both Mr. MatthewPocket and his son Herbert, if you suppose them to be otherwise than generous,upright, open, and incapable of anything designing or mean."
"They are your friends," said Miss Havisham.
"They made themselves my friends," said I, "when they supposed me to havesuperseded them; and when Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camillawere not my friends, I think."
This contrasting of them with the rest seemed, I was glad to see, to do themgood with her. She looked at me keenly for a little while, and then saidquietly,—
"What do you want for them?"
"Only," said I, "that you would not confound them with the others. They may beof the same blood, but, believe me, they are not of the same nature."
Still looking at me keenly, Miss Havisham repeated,—
"What do you want for them?"
"I am not so cunning, you see," I said, in answer, conscious that I reddened alittle, "as that I could hide from you, even if I desired, that I do wantsomething. Miss Havisham, if you would spare the money to do my friend Herberta lasting service in life, but which from the nature of the case must be donewithout his knowledge, I could show you how."
"Why must it be done without his knowledge?" she asked, settling her hands uponher stick, that she might regard me the more attentively.
"Because," said I, "I began the service myself, more than two years ago,without his knowledge, and I don't want to be betrayed. Why I fail in myability to finish it, I cannot explain. It is a part of the secret which isanother person's and not mine."
She gradually withdrew her eyes from me, and turned them on the fire. Afterwatching it for what appeared in the silence and by the light of the slowlywasting candles to be a long time, she was roused by the collapse of some ofthe red coals, and looked towards me again—at first, vacantly—then, with agradually concentrating attention. All this time Estella knitted on. When MissHavisham had fixed her attention on me, she said, speaking as if there had beenno lapse in our dialogue,—
"What else?"
"Estella," said I, turning to her now, and trying to command my tremblingvoice, "you know I love you. You know that I have loved you long and dearly."
She raised her eyes to my face, on being thus addressed, and her fingers pliedtheir work, and she looked at me with an unmoved countenance. I saw that MissHavisham glanced from me to her, and from her to me.
"I should have said this sooner, but for my long mistake. It induced me to hopethat Miss Havisham meant us for one another. While I thought you could not helpyourself, as it were, I refrained from saying it. But I must say it now."
Preserving her unmoved countenance, and with her fingers still going, Estellashook her head.
"I know," said I, in answer to that action,—"I know. I have no hope that Ishall ever call you mine, Estella. I am ignorant what may become of me verysoon, how poor I may be, or where I may go. Still, I love you. I have loved youever since I first saw you in this house."
Looking at me perfectly unmoved and with her fingers busy, she shook her headagain.
"It would have been cruel in Miss Havisham, horribly cruel, to practise on thesusceptibility of a poor boy, and to torture me through all these years with avain hope and an idle pursuit, if she had reflected on the gravity of what shedid. But I think she did not. I think that, in the endurance of her own trial,she forgot mine, Estella."
I saw Miss Havisham put her hand to her heart and hold it there, as she satlooking by turns at Estella and at me.
"It seems," said Estella, very calmly, "that there are sentiments, fancies,—Idon't know how to call them,—which I am not able to comprehend. When you sayyou love me, I know what you mean, as a form of words; but nothing more. Youaddress nothing in my breast, you touch nothing there. I don't care for whatyou say at all. I have tried to warn you of this; now, have I not?"
I said in a miserable manner, "Yes."
"Yes. But you would not be warned, for you thought I did not mean it. Now, didyou not think so?"
"I thought and hoped you could not mean it. You, so young, untried, andbeautiful, Estella! Surely it is not in Nature."
"It is in my nature," she returned. And then she added, with a stressupon the words, "It is in the nature formed within me. I make a greatdifference between you and all other people when I say so much. I can do nomore."
"Is it not true," said I, "that Bentley Drummle is in town here, and pursuingyou?"
"It is quite true," she replied, referring to him with the indifference ofutter contempt.
"That you encourage him, and ride out with him, and that he dines with you thisvery day?"
She seemed a little surprised that I should know it, but again replied, "Quitetrue."
"You cannot love him, Estella!"
Her fingers stopped for the first time, as she retorted rather angrily, "Whathave I told you? Do you still think, in spite of it, that I do not mean what Isay?"
"You would never marry him, Estella?"
She looked towards Miss Havisham, and considered for a moment with her work inher hands. Then she said, "Why not tell you the truth? I am going to be marriedto him."
I dropped my face into my hands, but was able to control myself better than Icould have expected, considering what agony it gave me to hear her say thosewords. When I raised my face again, there was such a ghastly look upon MissHavisham's, that it impressed me, even in my passionate hurry and grief.
"Estella, dearest Estella, do not let Miss Havisham lead you into this fatalstep. Put me aside for ever,—you have done so, I well know,—but bestow yourselfon some worthier person than Drummle. Miss Havisham gives you to him, as thegreatest slight and injury that could be done to the many far better men whoadmire you, and to the few who truly love you. Among those few there may be onewho loves you even as dearly, though he has not loved you as long, as I. Takehim, and I can bear it better, for your sake!"
My earnestness awoke a wonder in her that seemed as if it would have beentouched with compassion, if she could have rendered me at all intelligible toher own mind.
"I am going," she said again, in a gentler voice, "to be married to him. Thepreparations for my marriage are making, and I shall be married soon. Why doyou injuriously introduce the name of my mother by adoption? It is my own act."
"Your own act, Estella, to fling yourself away upon a brute?"
"On whom should I fling myself away?" she retorted, with a smile. "Should Ifling myself away upon the man who would the soonest feel (if people do feelsuch things) that I took nothing to him? There! It is done. I shall do wellenough, and so will my husband. As to leading me into what you call this fatalstep, Miss Havisham would have had me wait, and not marry yet; but I am tiredof the life I have led, which has very few charms for me, and I am willingenough to change it. Say no more. We shall never understand each other."
"Such a mean brute, such a stupid brute!" I urged, in despair.
"Don't be afraid of my being a blessing to him," said Estella; "I shall not bethat. Come! Here is my hand. Do we part on this, you visionary boy—or man?"
"O Estella!" I answered, as my bitter tears fell fast on her hand, do what Iwould to restrain them; "even if I remained in England and could hold my headup with the rest, how could I see you Drummle's wife?"
"Nonsense," she returned,—"nonsense. This will pass in no time."
"Never, Estella!"
"You will get me out of your thoughts in a week."
"Out of my thoughts! You are part of my existence, part of myself. You havebeen in every line I have ever read since I first came here, the rough commonboy whose poor heart you wounded even then. You have been in every prospect Ihave ever seen since,—on the river, on the sails of the ships, on the marshes,in the clouds, in the light, in the darkness, in the wind, in the woods, in thesea, in the streets. You have been the embodiment of every graceful fancy thatmy mind has ever become acquainted with. The stones of which the strongestLondon buildings are made are not more real, or more impossible to be displacedby your hands, than your presence and influence have been to me, there andeverywhere, and will be. Estella, to the last hour of my life, you cannotchoose but remain part of my character, part of the little good in me, part ofthe evil. But, in this separation, I associate you only with the good; and Iwill faithfully hold you to that always, for you must have done me far moregood than harm, let me feel now what sharp distress I may. O God bless you, Godforgive you!"
In what ecstasy of unhappiness I got these broken words out of myself, I don'tknow. The rhapsody welled up within me, like blood from an inward wound, andgushed out. I held her hand to my lips some lingering moments, and so I lefther. But ever afterwards, I remembered,—and soon afterwards with strongerreason,—that while Estella looked at me merely with incredulous wonder, thespectral figure of Miss Havisham, her hand still covering her heart, seemed allresolved into a ghastly stare of pity and remorse.
All done, all gone! So much was done and gone, that when I went out at thegate, the light of the day seemed of a darker colour than when I went in. For awhile, I hid myself among some lanes and by-paths, and then struck off to walkall the way to London. For, I had by that time come to myself so far as toconsider that I could not go back to the inn and see Drummle there; that Icould not bear to sit upon the coach and be spoken to; that I could do nothinghalf so good for myself as tire myself out.
It was past midnight when I crossed London Bridge. Pursuing the narrowintricacies of the streets which at that time tended westward near theMiddlesex shore of the river, my readiest access to the Temple was close by theriver-side, through Whitefriars. I was not expected till to-morrow; but I hadmy keys, and, if Herbert were gone to bed, could get to bed myself withoutdisturbing him.
As it seldom happened that I came in at that Whitefriars gate after the Templewas closed, and as I was very muddy and weary, I did not take it ill that thenight-porter examined me with much attention as he held the gate a little wayopen for me to pass in. To help his memory I mentioned my name.
"I was not quite sure, sir, but I thought so. Here's a note, sir. The messengerthat brought it, said would you be so good as read it by my lantern?"




Much surprised by the request, I took the note. It was directed to Philip Pip,Esquire, and on the top of the superscription were the words, "PLEASEREAD THIS, HERE." I opened it, the watchman holding up his light, andread inside, in Wemmick's writing,—
"DON'T GO HOME."
