
Chapter XLV.
Turning from the Temple gate as soon as I had read the warning,I made the best of my way to Fleet Street, and there got a late hackney chariotand drove to the Hummums in Covent Garden. In those times a bed was always tobe got there at any hour of the night, and the chamberlain, letting me in athis ready wicket, lighted the candle next in order on his shelf, and showed mestraight into the bedroom next in order on his list. It was a sort of vault onthe ground floor at the back, with a despotic monster of a four-post bedsteadin it, straddling over the whole place, putting one of his arbitrary legs intothe fireplace and another into the doorway, and squeezing the wretched littlewashing-stand in quite a Divinely Righteous manner.
As I had asked for a night-light, the chamberlain had brought me in, before heleft me, the good old constitutional rushlight of those virtuous days—an objectlike the ghost of a walking-cane, which instantly broke its back if it weretouched, which nothing could ever be lighted at, and which was placed insolitary confinement at the bottom of a high tin tower, perforated with roundholes that made a staringly wide-awake pattern on the walls. When I had gotinto bed, and lay there footsore, weary, and wretched, I found that I could nomore close my own eyes than I could close the eyes of this foolish Argus. Andthus, in the gloom and death of the night, we stared at one another.
What a doleful night! How anxious, how dismal, how long! There was aninhospitable smell in the room, of cold soot and hot dust; and, as I looked upinto the corners of the tester over my head, I thought what a number ofblue-bottle flies from the butchers', and earwigs from the market, and grubsfrom the country, must be holding on up there, lying by for next summer. Thisled me to speculate whether any of them ever tumbled down, and then I fanciedthat I felt light falls on my face,—a disagreeable turn of thought, suggestingother and more objectionable approaches up my back. When I had lain awake alittle while, those extraordinary voices with which silence teems began to makethemselves audible. The closet whispered, the fireplace sighed, the littlewashing-stand ticked, and one guitar-string played occasionally in the chest ofdrawers. At about the same time, the eyes on the wall acquired a newexpression, and in every one of those staring rounds I saw written,DON'T GO HOME.
Whatever night-fancies and night-noises crowded on me, they never warded offthis DON'T GO HOME. It plaited itself intowhatever I thought of, as a bodily pain would have done. Not long before, I hadread in the newspapers, how a gentleman unknown had come to the Hummums in thenight, and had gone to bed, and had destroyed himself, and had been found inthe morning weltering in blood. It came into my head that he must have occupiedthis very vault of mine, and I got out of bed to assure myself that there wereno red marks about; then opened the door to look out into the passages, andcheer myself with the companionship of a distant light, near which I knew thechamberlain to be dozing. But all this time, why I was not to go home, and whathad happened at home, and when I should go home, and whether Provis was safe athome, were questions occupying my mind so busily, that one might have supposedthere could be no more room in it for any other theme. Even when I thought ofEstella, and how we had parted that day forever, and when I recalled all thecircumstances of our parting, and all her looks and tones, and the action ofher fingers while she knitted,—even then I was pursuing, here and there andeverywhere, the caution, Don't go home. When at last I dozed, in sheerexhaustion of mind and body, it became a vast shadowy verb which I had toconjugate. Imperative mood, present tense: Do not thou go home, let him not gohome, let us not go home, do not ye or you go home, let not them go home. Thenpotentially: I may not and I cannot go home; and I might not, could not, wouldnot, and should not go home; until I felt that I was going distracted, androlled over on the pillow, and looked at the staring rounds upon the wallagain.
I had left directions that I was to be called at seven; for it was plain that Imust see Wemmick before seeing any one else, and equally plain that this was acase in which his Walworth sentiments only could be taken. It was a relief toget out of the room where the night had been so miserable, and I needed nosecond knocking at the door to startle me from my uneasy bed.
The Castle battlements arose upon my view at eight o'clock. The little servanthappening to be entering the fortress with two hot rolls, I passed through thepostern and crossed the drawbridge in her company, and so came withoutannouncement into the presence of Wemmick as he was making tea for himself andthe Aged. An open door afforded a perspective view of the Aged in bed.
"Halloa, Mr. Pip!" said Wemmick. "You did come home, then?"
"Yes," I returned; "but I didn't go home."
"That's all right," said he, rubbing his hands. "I left a note for you at eachof the Temple gates, on the chance. Which gate did you come to?"
I told him.
"I'll go round to the others in the course of the day and destroy the notes,"said Wemmick; "it's a good rule never to leave documentary evidence if you canhelp it, because you don't know when it may be put in. I'm going to take aliberty with you. Would you mind toasting this sausage for the Aged P.?"
I said I should be delighted to do it.
"Then you can go about your work, Mary Anne," said Wemmick to the littleservant; "which leaves us to ourselves, don't you see, Mr. Pip?" he added,winking, as she disappeared.
I thanked him for his friendship and caution, and our discourse proceeded in alow tone, while I toasted the Aged's sausage and he buttered the crumb of theAged's roll.
"Now, Mr. Pip, you know," said Wemmick, "you and I understand one another. Weare in our private and personal capacities, and we have been engaged in aconfidential transaction before to-day. Official sentiments are one thing. Weare extra official."
I cordially assented. I was so very nervous, that I had already lighted theAged's sausage like a torch, and been obliged to blow it out.
"I accidentally heard, yesterday morning," said Wemmick, "being in a certainplace where I once took you,—even between you and me, it's as well not tomention names when avoidable—"
"Much better not," said I. "I understand you."
"I heard there by chance, yesterday morning," said Wemmick, "that a certainperson not altogether of uncolonial pursuits, and not unpossessed of portableproperty,—I don't know who it may really be,—we won't name this person—"
"Not necessary," said I.
"—Had made some little stir in a certain part of the world where a good manypeople go, not always in gratification of their own inclinations, and not quiteirrespective of the government expense—"
In watching his face, I made quite a firework of the Aged's sausage, andgreatly discomposed both my own attention and Wemmick's; for which Iapologised.
"—By disappearing from such place, and being no more heard of thereabouts. Fromwhich," said Wemmick, "conjectures had been raised and theories formed. I alsoheard that you at your chambers in Garden Court, Temple, had been watched, andmight be watched again."
"By whom?" said I.
"I wouldn't go into that," said Wemmick, evasively, "it might clash withofficial responsibilities. I heard it, as I have in my time heard other curiousthings in the same place. I don't tell it you on information received. I heardit."
He took the toasting-fork and sausage from me as he spoke, and set forth theAged's breakfast neatly on a little tray. Previous to placing it before him, hewent into the Aged's room with a clean white cloth, and tied the same under theold gentleman's chin, and propped him up, and put his nightcap on one side, andgave him quite a rakish air. Then he placed his breakfast before him with greatcare, and said, "All right, ain't you, Aged P.?" To which the cheerful Agedreplied, "All right, John, my boy, all right!" As there seemed to be a tacitunderstanding that the Aged was not in a presentable state, and was thereforeto be considered invisible, I made a pretence of being in complete ignorance ofthese proceedings.
"This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reason to suspect),"I said to Wemmick when he came back, "is inseparable from the person to whomyou have adverted; is it?"
Wemmick looked very serious. "I couldn't undertake to say that, of my ownknowledge. I mean, I couldn't undertake to say it was at first. But it eitheris, or it will be, or it's in great danger of being."
As I saw that he was restrained by fealty to Little Britain from saying as muchas he could, and as I knew with thankfulness to him how far out of his way hewent to say what he did, I could not press him. But I told him, after a littlemeditation over the fire, that I would like to ask him a question, subject tohis answering or not answering, as he deemed right, and sure that his coursewould be right. He paused in his breakfast, and crossing his arms, and pinchinghis shirt-sleeves (his notion of in-door comfort was to sit without any coat),he nodded to me once, to put my question.
"You have heard of a man of bad character, whose true name is Compeyson?"
He answered with one other nod.
"Is he living?"
One other nod.
"Is he in London?"
He gave me one other nod, compressed the post-office exceedingly, gave me onelast nod, and went on with his breakfast.
"Now," said Wemmick, "questioning being over," which he emphasised and repeatedfor my guidance, "I come to what I did, after hearing what I heard. I went toGarden Court to find you; not finding you, I went to Clarriker's to find Mr.Herbert."
"And him you found?" said I, with great anxiety.
"And him I found. Without mentioning any names or going into any details, Igave him to understand that if he was aware of anybody—Tom, Jack, orRichard—being about the chambers, or about the immediate neighbourhood, he hadbetter get Tom, Jack, or Richard out of the way while you were out of the way."
"He would be greatly puzzled what to do?"
"He was puzzled what to do; not the less, because I gave him my opinionthat it was not safe to try to get Tom, Jack, or Richard too far out of the wayat present. Mr. Pip, I'll tell you something. Under existing circumstances,there is no place like a great city when you are once in it. Don't break covertoo soon. Lie close. Wait till things slacken, before you try the open, evenfor foreign air."
I thanked him for his valuable advice, and asked him what Herbert had done?
"Mr. Herbert," said Wemmick, "after being all of a heap for half an hour,struck out a plan. He mentioned to me as a secret, that he is courting a younglady who has, as no doubt you are aware, a bedridden Pa. Which Pa, having beenin the Purser line of life, lies a-bed in a bow-window where he can see theships sail up and down the river. You are acquainted with the young lady, mostprobably?"
"Not personally," said I.
The truth was, that she had objected to me as an expensive companion who didHerbert no good, and that, when Herbert had first proposed to present me toher, she had received the proposal with such very moderate warmth, that Herberthad felt himself obliged to confide the state of the case to me, with a view tothe lapse of a little time before I made her acquaintance. When I had begun toadvance Herbert's prospects by stealth, I had been able to bear this withcheerful philosophy: he and his affianced, for their part, had naturally notbeen very anxious to introduce a third person into their interviews; and thus,although I was assured that I had risen in Clara's esteem, and although theyoung lady and I had long regularly interchanged messages and remembrances byHerbert, I had never seen her. However, I did not trouble Wemmick with theseparticulars.
"The house with the bow-window," said Wemmick, "being by the river-side, downthe Pool there between Limehouse and Greenwich, and being kept, it seems, by avery respectable widow who has a furnished upper floor to let, Mr. Herbert putit to me, what did I think of that as a temporary tenement for Tom, Jack, orRichard? Now, I thought very well of it, for three reasons I'll give you. Thatis to say: Firstly. It's altogether out of all your beats, and is wellaway from the usual heap of streets great and small. Secondly. Withoutgoing near it yourself, you could always hear of the safety of Tom, Jack, orRichard, through Mr. Herbert. Thirdly. After a while and when it mightbe prudent, if you should want to slip Tom, Jack, or Richard on board a foreignpacket-boat, there he is—ready."
Much comforted by these considerations, I thanked Wemmick again and again, andbegged him to proceed.
"Well, sir! Mr. Herbert threw himself into the business with a will, and bynine o'clock last night he housed Tom, Jack, or Richard,—whichever it maybe,—you and I don't want to know,—quite successfully. At the old lodgings itwas understood that he was summoned to Dover, and, in fact, he was taken downthe Dover road and cornered out of it. Now, another great advantage of all thisis, that it was done without you, and when, if any one was concerning himselfabout your movements, you must be known to be ever so many miles off and quiteotherwise engaged. This diverts suspicion and confuses it; and for the samereason I recommended that, even if you came back last night, you should not gohome. It brings in more confusion, and you want confusion."
Wemmick, having finished his breakfast, here looked at his watch, and began toget his coat on.
"And now, Mr. Pip," said he, with his hands still in the sleeves, "I haveprobably done the most I can do; but if I can ever do more,—from a Walworthpoint of view, and in a strictly private and personal capacity,—I shall be gladto do it. Here's the address. There can be no harm in your going here to-night,and seeing for yourself that all is well with Tom, Jack, or Richard, before yougo home,—which is another reason for your not going home last night. But, afteryou have gone home, don't go back here. You are very welcome, I am sure, Mr.Pip"; his hands were now out of his sleeves, and I was shaking them; "and letme finally impress one important point upon you." He laid his hands upon myshoulders, and added in a solemn whisper: "Avail yourself of this evening tolay hold of his portable property. You don't know what may happen to him. Don'tlet anything happen to the portable property."
Quite despairing of making my mind clear to Wemmick on this point, I forbore totry.
"Time's up," said Wemmick, "and I must be off. If you had nothing more pressingto do than to keep here till dark, that's what I should advise. You look verymuch worried, and it would do you good to have a perfectly quiet day with theAged,—he'll be up presently,—and a little bit of—you remember the pig?"
"Of course," said I.
"Well; and a little bit of him. That sausage you toasted was his, and hewas in all respects a first-rater. Do try him, if it is only for oldacquaintance sake. Good-bye, Aged Parent!" in a cheery shout.
"All right, John; all right, my boy!" piped the old man from within.
I soon fell asleep before Wemmick's fire, and the Aged and I enjoyed oneanother's society by falling asleep before it more or less all day. We had loinof pork for dinner, and greens grown on the estate; and I nodded at the Agedwith a good intention whenever I failed to do it drowsily. When it was quitedark, I left the Aged preparing the fire for toast; and I inferred from thenumber of teacups, as well as from his glances at the two little doors in thewall, that Miss Skiffins was expected.
