
Chapter XLVI.
Eighto'clock had struck before I got into the air, that was scented, notdisagreeably, by the chips and shavings of the long-shore boat-builders, andmast, oar, and block makers. All that water-side region of the upper and lowerPool below Bridge was unknown ground to me; and when I struck down by theriver, I found that the spot I wanted was not where I had supposed it to be,and was anything but easy to find. It was called Mill Pond Bank, Chinks'sBasin; and I had no other guide to Chinks's Basin than the Old Green CopperRope-walk.
It matters not what stranded ships repairing in dry docks I lost myself among,what old hulls of ships in course of being knocked to pieces, what ooze andslime and other dregs of tide, what yards of ship-builders and ship-breakers,what rusty anchors blindly biting into the ground, though for years off duty,what mountainous country of accumulated casks and timber, how many rope-walksthat were not the Old Green Copper. After several times falling short of mydestination and as often overshooting it, I came unexpectedly round a corner,upon Mill Pond Bank. It was a fresh kind of place, all circumstancesconsidered, where the wind from the river had room to turn itself round; andthere were two or three trees in it, and there was the stump of a ruinedwindmill, and there was the Old Green Copper Rope-walk,—whose long and narrowvista I could trace in the moonlight, along a series of wooden frames set inthe ground, that looked like superannuated haymaking-rakes which had grown oldand lost most of their teeth.
Selecting from the few queer houses upon Mill Pond Bank a house with a woodenfront and three stories of bow-window (not bay-window, which is another thing),I looked at the plate upon the door, and read there, Mrs. Whimple. That beingthe name I wanted, I knocked, and an elderly woman of a pleasant and thrivingappearance responded. She was immediately deposed, however, by Herbert, whosilently led me into the parlour and shut the door. It was an odd sensation tosee his very familiar face established quite at home in that very unfamiliarroom and region; and I found myself looking at him, much as I looked at thecorner-cupboard with the glass and china, the shells upon the chimney-piece,and the coloured engravings on the wall, representing the death of CaptainCook, a ship-launch, and his Majesty King George the Third in a statecoachman's wig, leather-breeches, and top-boots, on the terrace at Windsor.
"All is well, Handel," said Herbert, "and he is quite satisfied, though eagerto see you. My dear girl is with her father; and if you'll wait till she comesdown, I'll make you known to her, and then we'll go upstairs. That's herfather."
I had become aware of an alarming growling overhead, and had probably expressedthe fact in my countenance.
"I am afraid he is a sad old rascal," said Herbert, smiling, "but I have neverseen him. Don't you smell rum? He is always at it."
"At rum?" said I.
"Yes," returned Herbert, "and you may suppose how mild it makes his gout. Hepersists, too, in keeping all the provisions upstairs in his room, and servingthem out. He keeps them on shelves over his head, and will weigh themall. His room must be like a chandler's shop."
While he thus spoke, the growling noise became a prolonged roar, and then diedaway.
"What else can be the consequence," said Herbert, in explanation, "if hewill cut the cheese? A man with the gout in his right hand—andeverywhere else—can't expect to get through a Double Gloucester without hurtinghimself."
He seemed to have hurt himself very much, for he gave another furious roar.
"To have Provis for an upper lodger is quite a godsend to Mrs. Whimple," saidHerbert, "for of course people in general won't stand that noise. A curiousplace, Handel; isn't it?"
It was a curious place, indeed; but remarkably well kept and clean.
"Mrs. Whimple," said Herbert, when I told him so, "is the best of housewives,and I really do not know what my Clara would do without her motherly help. For,Clara has no mother of her own, Handel, and no relation in the world but oldGruffandgrim."
"Surely that's not his name, Herbert?"
"No, no," said Herbert, "that's my name for him. His name is Mr. Barley. Butwhat a blessing it is for the son of my father and mother to love a girl whohas no relations, and who can never bother herself or anybody else about herfamily!"
Herbert had told me on former occasions, and now reminded me, that he firstknew Miss Clara Barley when she was completing her education at anestablishment at Hammersmith, and that on her being recalled home to nurse herfather, he and she had confided their affection to the motherly Mrs. Whimple,by whom it had been fostered and regulated with equal kindness and discretion,ever since. It was understood that nothing of a tender nature could possibly beconfided to old Barley, by reason of his being totally unequal to theconsideration of any subject more psychological than Gout, Rum, and Purser'sstores.
As we were thus conversing in a low tone while Old Barley's sustained growlvibrated in the beam that crossed the ceiling, the room door opened, and a verypretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so came in with a basket in herhand: whom Herbert tenderly relieved of the basket, and presented, blushing, as"Clara." She really was a most charming girl, and might have passed for acaptive fairy, whom that truculent Ogre, Old Barley, had pressed into hisservice.
"Look here," said Herbert, showing me the basket, with a compassionate andtender smile, after we had talked a little; "here's poor Clara's supper, servedout every night. Here's her allowance of bread, and here's her slice of cheese,and here's her rum,—which I drink. This is Mr. Barley's breakfast forto-morrow, served out to be cooked. Two mutton-chops, three potatoes, somesplit peas, a little flour, two ounces of butter, a pinch of salt, and all thisblack pepper. It's stewed up together, and taken hot, and it's a nice thing forthe gout, I should think!"
There was something so natural and winning in Clara's resigned way of lookingat these stores in detail, as Herbert pointed them out; and something soconfiding, loving, and innocent in her modest manner of yielding herself toHerbert's embracing arm; and something so gentle in her, so much needingprotection on Mill Pond Bank, by Chinks's Basin, and the Old Green CopperRope-walk, with Old Barley growling in the beam,—that I would not have undonethe engagement between her and Herbert for all the money in the pocket-book Ihad never opened.
I was looking at her with pleasure and admiration, when suddenly the growlswelled into a roar again, and a frightful bumping noise was heard above, as ifa giant with a wooden leg were trying to bore it through the ceiling to come atus. Upon this Clara said to Herbert, "Papa wants me, darling!" and ran away.
"There is an unconscionable old shark for you!" said Herbert. "What do yousuppose he wants now, Handel?"
"I don't know," said I. "Something to drink?"
"That's it!" cried Herbert, as if I had made a guess of extraordinary merit."He keeps his grog ready mixed in a little tub on the table. Wait a moment, andyou'll hear Clara lift him up to take some. There he goes!" Another roar, witha prolonged shake at the end. "Now," said Herbert, as it was succeeded bysilence, "he's drinking. Now," said Herbert, as the growl resounded in the beamonce more, "he's down again on his back!"
Clara returned soon afterwards, and Herbert accompanied me upstairs to see ourcharge. As we passed Mr. Barley's door, he was heard hoarsely muttering within,in a strain that rose and fell like wind, the following Refrain, in which Isubstitute good wishes for something quite the reverse:—
"Ahoy! Bless your eyes, here's old Bill Barley. Here's old Bill Barley, blessyour eyes. Here's old Bill Barley on the flat of his back, by the Lord. Lyingon the flat of his back like a drifting old dead flounder, here's your old BillBarley, bless your eyes. Ahoy! Bless you."
In this strain of consolation, Herbert informed me the invisible Barley wouldcommune with himself by the day and night together; Often, while it was light,having, at the same time, one eye at a telescope which was fitted on his bedfor the convenience of sweeping the river.
In his two cabin rooms at the top of the house, which were fresh and airy, andin which Mr. Barley was less audible than below, I found Provis comfortablysettled. He expressed no alarm, and seemed to feel none that was worthmentioning; but it struck me that he was softened,—indefinably, for I could nothave said how, and could never afterwards recall how when I tried, butcertainly.
The opportunity that the day's rest had given me for reflection had resulted inmy fully determining to say nothing to him respecting Compeyson. For anything Iknew, his animosity towards the man might otherwise lead to his seeking him outand rushing on his own destruction. Therefore, when Herbert and I sat down withhim by his fire, I asked him first of all whether he relied on Wemmick'sjudgment and sources of information?
"Ay, ay, dear boy!" he answered, with a grave nod, "Jaggers knows."
"Then, I have talked with Wemmick," said I, "and have come to tell you whatcaution he gave me and what advice."
This I did accurately, with the reservation just mentioned; and I told him howWemmick had heard, in Newgate prison (whether from officers or prisoners Icould not say), that he was under some suspicion, and that my chambers had beenwatched; how Wemmick had recommended his keeping close for a time, and mykeeping away from him; and what Wemmick had said about getting him abroad. Iadded, that of course, when the time came, I should go with him, or shouldfollow close upon him, as might be safest in Wemmick's judgment. What was tofollow that I did not touch upon; neither, indeed, was I at all clear orcomfortable about it in my own mind, now that I saw him in that softercondition, and in declared peril for my sake. As to altering my way of livingby enlarging my expenses, I put it to him whether in our present unsettled anddifficult circumstances, it would not be simply ridiculous, if it were noworse?
He could not deny this, and indeed was very reasonable throughout. His comingback was a venture, he said, and he had always known it to be a venture. Hewould do nothing to make it a desperate venture, and he had very little fear ofhis safety with such good help.
Herbert, who had been looking at the fire and pondering, here said thatsomething had come into his thoughts arising out of Wemmick's suggestion, whichit might be worth while to pursue. "We are both good watermen, Handel, andcould take him down the river ourselves when the right time comes. No boatwould then be hired for the purpose, and no boatmen; that would save at least achance of suspicion, and any chance is worth saving. Never mind the season;don't you think it might be a good thing if you began at once to keep a boat atthe Temple stairs, and were in the habit of rowing up and down the river? Youfall into that habit, and then who notices or minds? Do it twenty or fiftytimes, and there is nothing special in your doing it the twenty-first orfifty-first."
I liked this scheme, and Provis was quite elated by it. We agreed that itshould be carried into execution, and that Provis should never recognise us ifwe came below Bridge, and rowed past Mill Pond Bank. But we further agreed thathe should pull down the blind in that part of his window which gave upon theeast, whenever he saw us and all was right.
Our conference being now ended, and everything arranged, I rose to go;remarking to Herbert that he and I had better not go home together, and that Iwould take half an hour's start of him. "I don't like to leave you here," Isaid to Provis, "though I cannot doubt your being safer here than near me.Good-bye!"
"Dear boy," he answered, clasping my hands, "I don't know when we may meetagain, and I don't like good-bye. Say good-night!"
"Good-night! Herbert will go regularly between us, and when the time comes youmay be certain I shall be ready. Good-night, good-night!"
We thought it best that he should stay in his own rooms; and we left him on thelanding outside his door, holding a light over the stair-rail to light usdownstairs. Looking back at him, I thought of the first night of his return,when our positions were reversed, and when I little supposed my heart couldever be as heavy and anxious at parting from him as it was now.
Old Barley was growling and swearing when we repassed his door, with noappearance of having ceased or of meaning to cease. When we got to the foot ofthe stairs, I asked Herbert whether he had preserved the name of Provis. Hereplied, certainly not, and that the lodger was Mr. Campbell. He also explainedthat the utmost known of Mr. Campbell there was, that he (Herbert) had Mr.Campbell consigned to him, and felt a strong personal interest in his beingwell cared for, and living a secluded life. So, when we went into the parlourwhere Mrs. Whimple and Clara were seated at work, I said nothing of my owninterest in Mr. Campbell, but kept it to myself.
When I had taken leave of the pretty, gentle, dark-eyed girl, and of themotherly woman who had not outlived her honest sympathy with a little affair oftrue love, I felt as if the Old Green Copper Rope-walk had grown quite adifferent place. Old Barley might be as old as the hills, and might swear likea whole field of troopers, but there were redeeming youth and trust and hopeenough in Chinks's Basin to fill it to overflowing. And then I thought ofEstella, and of our parting, and went home very sadly.
All things were as quiet in the Temple as ever I had seen them. The windows ofthe rooms on that side, lately occupied by Provis, were dark and still, andthere was no lounger in Garden Court. I walked past the fountain twice orthrice before I descended the steps that were between me and my rooms, but Iwas quite alone. Herbert, coming to my bedside when he came in,—for I wentstraight to bed, dispirited and fatigued,—made the same report. Opening one ofthe windows after that, he looked out into the moonlight, and told me that thepavement was as solemnly empty as the pavement of any cathedral at that samehour.
Next day I set myself to get the boat. It was soon done, and the boat wasbrought round to the Temple stairs, and lay where I could reach her within aminute or two. Then, I began to go out as for training and practice: sometimesalone, sometimes with Herbert. I was often out in cold, rain, and sleet, butnobody took much note of me after I had been out a few times. At first, I keptabove Blackfriars Bridge; but as the hours of the tide changed, I took towardsLondon Bridge. It was Old London Bridge in those days, and at certain states ofthe tide there was a race and fall of water there which gave it a badreputation. But I knew well enough how to ‘shoot' the bridge after seeing itdone, and so began to row about among the shipping in the Pool, and down toErith. The first time I passed Mill Pond Bank, Herbert and I were pulling apair of oars; and, both in going and returning, we saw the blind towards theeast come down. Herbert was rarely there less frequently than three times in aweek, and he never brought me a single word of intelligence that was at allalarming. Still, I knew that there was cause for alarm, and I could not get ridof the notion of being watched. Once received, it is a haunting idea; how manyundesigning persons I suspected of watching me, it would be hard to calculate.
In short, I was always full of fears for the rash man who was in hiding.Herbert had sometimes said to me that he found it pleasant to stand at one ofour windows after dark, when the tide was running down, and to think that itwas flowing, with everything it bore, towards Clara. But I thought with dreadthat it was flowing towards Magwitch, and that any black mark on its surfacemight be his pursuers, going swiftly, silently, and surely, to take him.
