
Chapter XLVII.
Someweeks passed without bringing any change. We waited for Wemmick, and he made nosign. If I had never known him out of Little Britain, and had never enjoyed theprivilege of being on a familiar footing at the Castle, I might have doubtedhim; not so for a moment, knowing him as I did.
My worldly affairs began to wear a gloomy appearance, and I was pressed formoney by more than one creditor. Even I myself began to know the want of money(I mean of ready money in my own pocket), and to relieve it by converting someeasily spared articles of jewelery into cash. But I had quite determined thatit would be a heartless fraud to take more money from my patron in the existingstate of my uncertain thoughts and plans. Therefore, I had sent him theunopened pocket-book by Herbert, to hold in his own keeping, and I felt a kindof satisfaction—whether it was a false kind or a true, I hardly know—in nothaving profited by his generosity since his revelation of himself.
As the time wore on, an impression settled heavily upon me that Estella wasmarried. Fearful of having it confirmed, though it was all but a conviction, Iavoided the newspapers, and begged Herbert (to whom I had confided thecircumstances of our last interview) never to speak of her to me. Why I hoardedup this last wretched little rag of the robe of hope that was rent and given tothe winds, how do I know? Why did you who read this, commit that not dissimilarinconsistency of your own last year, last month, last week?
It was an unhappy life that I lived; and its one dominant anxiety, toweringover all its other anxieties, like a high mountain above a range of mountains,never disappeared from my view. Still, no new cause for fear arose. Let mestart from my bed as I would, with the terror fresh upon me that he wasdiscovered; let me sit listening, as I would with dread, for Herbert'sreturning step at night, lest it should be fleeter than ordinary, and wingedwith evil news,—for all that, and much more to like purpose, the round ofthings went on. Condemned to inaction and a state of constant restlessness andsuspense, I rowed about in my boat, and waited, waited, waited, as I bestcould.
There were states of the tide when, having been down the river, I could not getback through the eddy-chafed arches and starlings of old London Bridge; then, Ileft my boat at a wharf near the Custom House, to be brought up afterwards tothe Temple stairs. I was not averse to doing this, as it served to make me andmy boat a commoner incident among the water-side people there. From this slightoccasion sprang two meetings that I have now to tell of.
One afternoon, late in the month of February, I came ashore at the wharf atdusk. I had pulled down as far as Greenwich with the ebb tide, and had turnedwith the tide. It had been a fine bright day, but had become foggy as the sundropped, and I had had to feel my way back among the shipping, prettycarefully. Both in going and returning, I had seen the signal in his window,All well.
As it was a raw evening, and I was cold, I thought I would comfort myself withdinner at once; and as I had hours of dejection and solitude before me if Iwent home to the Temple, I thought I would afterwards go to the play. Thetheatre where Mr. Wopsle had achieved his questionable triumph was in thatwater-side neighbourhood (it is nowhere now), and to that theatre I resolved togo. I was aware that Mr. Wopsle had not succeeded in reviving the Drama, but,on the contrary, had rather partaken of its decline. He had been ominouslyheard of, through the play-bills, as a faithful Black, in connection with alittle girl of noble birth, and a monkey. And Herbert had seen him as apredatory Tartar of comic propensities, with a face like a red brick, and anoutrageous hat all over bells.
I dined at what Herbert and I used to call a geographical chop-house, wherethere were maps of the world in porter-pot rims on every half-yard of thetablecloths, and charts of gravy on every one of the knives,—to this day thereis scarcely a single chop-house within the Lord Mayor's dominions which is notgeographical,—and wore out the time in dozing over crumbs, staring at gas, andbaking in a hot blast of dinners. By and by, I roused myself, and went to theplay.
There, I found a virtuous boatswain in His Majesty's service,—a most excellentman, though I could have wished his trousers not quite so tight in some places,and not quite so loose in others,—who knocked all the little men's hats overtheir eyes, though he was very generous and brave, and who wouldn't hear ofanybody's paying taxes, though he was very patriotic. He had a bag of money inhis pocket, like a pudding in the cloth, and on that property married a youngperson in bed-furniture, with great rejoicings; the whole population ofPortsmouth (nine in number at the last census) turning out on the beach to rubtheir own hands and shake everybody else's, and sing "Fill, fill!" A certaindark-complexioned Swab, however, who wouldn't fill, or do anything else thatwas proposed to him, and whose heart was openly stated (by the boatswain) to beas black as his figure-head, proposed to two other Swabs to get all mankindinto difficulties; which was so effectually done (the Swab family havingconsiderable political influence) that it took half the evening to set thingsright, and then it was only brought about through an honest little grocer witha white hat, black gaiters, and red nose, getting into a clock, with agridiron, and listening, and coming out, and knocking everybody down frombehind with the gridiron whom he couldn't confute with what he had overheard.This led to Mr. Wopsle's (who had never been heard of before) coming in with astar and garter on, as a plenipotentiary of great power direct from theAdmiralty, to say that the Swabs were all to go to prison on the spot, and thathe had brought the boatswain down the Union Jack, as a slight acknowledgment ofhis public services. The boatswain, unmanned for the first time, respectfullydried his eyes on the Jack, and then cheering up, and addressing Mr. Wopsle asYour Honour, solicited permission to take him by the fin. Mr. Wopsle, concedinghis fin with a gracious dignity, was immediately shoved into a dusty corner,while everybody danced a hornpipe; and from that corner, surveying the publicwith a discontented eye, became aware of me.
The second piece was the last new grand comic Christmas pantomime, in the firstscene of which, it pained me to suspect that I detected Mr. Wopsle with redworsted legs under a highly magnified phosphoric countenance and a shock of redcurtain-fringe for his hair, engaged in the manufacture of thunderbolts in amine, and displaying great cowardice when his gigantic master came home (veryhoarse) to dinner. But he presently presented himself under worthiercircumstances; for, the Genius of Youthful Love being in want of assistance,—onaccount of the parental brutality of an ignorant farmer who opposed the choiceof his daughter's heart, by purposely falling upon the object, in a flour-sack,out of the first-floor window,—summoned a sententious Enchanter; and he, comingup from the antipodes rather unsteadily, after an apparently violent journey,proved to be Mr. Wopsle in a high-crowned hat, with a necromantic work in onevolume under his arm. The business of this enchanter on earth being principallyto be talked at, sung at, butted at, danced at, and flashed at with fires ofvarious colours, he had a good deal of time on his hands. And I observed, withgreat surprise, that he devoted it to staring in my direction as if he werelost in amazement.
There was something so remarkable in the increasing glare of Mr. Wopsle's eye,and he seemed to be turning so many things over in his mind and to grow soconfused, that I could not make it out. I sat thinking of it long after he hadascended to the clouds in a large watch-case, and still I could not make itout. I was still thinking of it when I came out of the theatre an hourafterwards, and found him waiting for me near the door.
"How do you do?" said I, shaking hands with him as we turned down the streettogether. "I saw that you saw me."
"Saw you, Mr. Pip!" he returned. "Yes, of course I saw you. But who else wasthere?"
"Who else?"
"It is the strangest thing," said Mr. Wopsle, drifting into his lost lookagain; "and yet I could swear to him."
Becoming alarmed, I entreated Mr. Wopsle to explain his meaning.
"Whether I should have noticed him at first but for your being there," said Mr.Wopsle, going on in the same lost way, "I can't be positive; yet I think Ishould."
Involuntarily I looked round me, as I was accustomed to look round me when Iwent home; for these mysterious words gave me a chill.
"Oh! He can't be in sight," said Mr. Wopsle. "He went out before I went off. Isaw him go."
Having the reason that I had for being suspicious, I even suspected this pooractor. I mistrusted a design to entrap me into some admission. Therefore Iglanced at him as we walked on together, but said nothing.
"I had a ridiculous fancy that he must be with you, Mr. Pip, till I saw thatyou were quite unconscious of him, sitting behind you there like a ghost."
My former chill crept over me again, but I was resolved not to speak yet, forit was quite consistent with his words that he might be set on to induce me toconnect these references with Provis. Of course, I was perfectly sure and safethat Provis had not been there.
"I dare say you wonder at me, Mr. Pip; indeed, I see you do. But it is so verystrange! You'll hardly believe what I am going to tell you. I could hardlybelieve it myself, if you told me."
"Indeed?" said I.
"No, indeed. Mr. Pip, you remember in old times a certain Christmas Day, whenyou were quite a child, and I dined at Gargery's, and some soldiers came to thedoor to get a pair of handcuffs mended?"
"I remember it very well."
"And you remember that there was a chase after two convicts, and that we joinedin it, and that Gargery took you on his back, and that I took the lead, and youkept up with me as well as you could?"
"I remember it all very well." Better than he thought,—except the last clause.
"And you remember that we came up with the two in a ditch, and that there was ascuffle between them, and that one of them had been severely handled and muchmauled about the face by the other?"
"I see it all before me."
"And that the soldiers lighted torches, and put the two in the centre, and thatwe went on to see the last of them, over the black marshes, with the torchlightshining on their faces,—I am particular about that,—with the torchlight shiningon their faces, when there was an outer ring of dark night all about us?"
"Yes," said I. "I remember all that."
"Then, Mr. Pip, one of those two prisoners sat behind you tonight. I saw himover your shoulder."
"Steady!" I thought. I asked him then, "Which of the two do you suppose yousaw?"
"The one who had been mauled," he answered readily, "and I'll swear I saw him!The more I think of him, the more certain I am of him."
"This is very curious!" said I, with the best assumption I could put on of itsbeing nothing more to me. "Very curious indeed!"
I cannot exaggerate the enhanced disquiet into which this conversation threwme, or the special and peculiar terror I felt at Compeyson's having been behindme "like a ghost." For if he had ever been out of my thoughts for a few momentstogether since the hiding had begun, it was in those very moments when he wasclosest to me; and to think that I should be so unconscious and off my guardafter all my care was as if I had shut an avenue of a hundred doors to keep himout, and then had found him at my elbow. I could not doubt, either, that he wasthere, because I was there, and that, however slight an appearance of dangerthere might be about us, danger was always near and active.
I put such questions to Mr. Wopsle as, When did the man come in? He could nottell me that; he saw me, and over my shoulder he saw the man. It was not untilhe had seen him for some time that he began to identify him; but he had fromthe first vaguely associated him with me, and known him as somehow belonging tome in the old village time. How was he dressed? Prosperously, but notnoticeably otherwise; he thought, in black. Was his face at all disfigured? No,he believed not. I believed not too, for, although in my brooding state I hadtaken no especial notice of the people behind me, I thought it likely that aface at all disfigured would have attracted my attention.
When Mr. Wopsle had imparted to me all that he could recall or I extract, andwhen I had treated him to a little appropriate refreshment, after the fatiguesof the evening, we parted. It was between twelve and one o'clock when I reachedthe Temple, and the gates were shut. No one was near me when I went in and wenthome.
Herbert had come in, and we held a very serious council by the fire. But therewas nothing to be done, saving to communicate to Wemmick what I had that nightfound out, and to remind him that we waited for his hint. As I thought that Imight compromise him if I went too often to the Castle, I made thiscommunication by letter. I wrote it before I went to bed, and went out andposted it; and again no one was near me. Herbert and I agreed that we could donothing else but be very cautious. And we were very cautious indeed,—morecautious than before, if that were possible,—and I for my part never went nearChinks's Basin, except when I rowed by, and then I only looked at Mill PondBank as I looked at anything else.
