
Chapter XLIX.
Putting Miss Havisham's note in my pocket, that it might serveas my credentials for so soon reappearing at Satis House, in case herwaywardness should lead her to express any surprise at seeing me, I went downagain by the coach next day. But I alighted at the Halfway House, andbreakfasted there, and walked the rest of the distance; for I sought to getinto the town quietly by the unfrequented ways, and to leave it in the samemanner.
The best light of the day was gone when I passed along the quiet echoing courtsbehind the High Street. The nooks of ruin where the old monks had once hadtheir refectories and gardens, and where the strong walls were now pressed intothe service of humble sheds and stables, were almost as silent as the old monksin their graves. The cathedral chimes had at once a sadder and a more remotesound to me, as I hurried on avoiding observation, than they had ever hadbefore; so, the swell of the old organ was borne to my ears like funeral music;and the rooks, as they hovered about the grey tower and swung in the bare hightrees of the priory garden, seemed to call to me that the place was changed,and that Estella was gone out of it for ever.
An elderly woman, whom I had seen before as one of the servants who lived inthe supplementary house across the back courtyard, opened the gate. The lightedcandle stood in the dark passage within, as of old, and I took it up andascended the staircase alone. Miss Havisham was not in her own room, but was inthe larger room across the landing. Looking in at the door, after knocking invain, I saw her sitting on the hearth in a ragged chair, close before, and lostin the contemplation of, the ashy fire.
Doing as I had often done, I went in, and stood touching the old chimney-piece,where she could see me when she raised her eyes. There was an air of utterloneliness upon her, that would have moved me to pity though she had wilfullydone me a deeper injury than I could charge her with. As I stoodcompassionating her, and thinking how, in the progress of time, I too had cometo be a part of the wrecked fortunes of that house, her eyes rested on me. Shestared, and said in a low voice, "Is it real?"
"It is I, Pip. Mr. Jaggers gave me your note yesterday, and I have lost notime."
"Thank you. Thank you."
As I brought another of the ragged chairs to the hearth and sat down, Iremarked a new expression on her face, as if she were afraid of me.
"I want," she said, "to pursue that subject you mentioned to me when you werelast here, and to show you that I am not all stone. But perhaps you can neverbelieve, now, that there is anything human in my heart?"
When I said some reassuring words, she stretched out her tremulous right hand,as though she was going to touch me; but she recalled it again before Iunderstood the action, or knew how to receive it.
"You said, speaking for your friend, that you could tell me how to do somethinguseful and good. Something that you would like done, is it not?"
"Something that I would like done very much."
"What is it?"
I began explaining to her that secret history of the partnership. I had not gotfar into it, when I judged from her looks that she was thinking in a discursiveway of me, rather than of what I said. It seemed to be so; for, when I stoppedspeaking, many moments passed before she showed that she was conscious of thefact.
"Do you break off," she asked then, with her former air of being afraid of me,"because you hate me too much to bear to speak to me?"
"No, no," I answered, "how can you think so, Miss Havisham! I stopped because Ithought you were not following what I said."
"Perhaps I was not," she answered, putting a hand to her head. "Begin again,and let me look at something else. Stay! Now tell me."
She set her hand upon her stick in the resolute way that sometimes was habitualto her, and looked at the fire with a strong expression of forcing herself toattend. I went on with my explanation, and told her how I had hoped to completethe transaction out of my means, but how in this I was disappointed. That partof the subject (I reminded her) involved matters which could form no part of myexplanation, for they were the weighty secrets of another.
"So!" said she, assenting with her head, but not looking at me. "And how muchmoney is wanting to complete the purchase?"
I was rather afraid of stating it, for it sounded a large sum. "Nine hundredpounds."
"If I give you the money for this purpose, will you keep my secret as you havekept your own?"
"Quite as faithfully."
"And your mind will be more at rest?"
"Much more at rest."
"Are you very unhappy now?"
She asked this question, still without looking at me, but in an unwonted toneof sympathy. I could not reply at the moment, for my voice failed me. She puther left arm across the head of her stick, and softly laid her forehead on it.
"I am far from happy, Miss Havisham; but I have other causes of disquiet thanany you know of. They are the secrets I have mentioned."
After a little while, she raised her head, and looked at the fire again.
"It is noble in you to tell me that you have other causes of unhappiness. Is ittrue?"
"Too true."
"Can I only serve you, Pip, by serving your friend? Regarding that as done, isthere nothing I can do for you yourself?"
"Nothing. I thank you for the question. I thank you even more for the tone ofthe question. But there is nothing."
She presently rose from her seat, and looked about the blighted room for themeans of writing. There were none there, and she took from her pocket a yellowset of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnished gold, and wrote upon them with apencil in a case of tarnished gold that hung from her neck.
"You are still on friendly terms with Mr. Jaggers?"
"Quite. I dined with him yesterday."
"This is an authority to him to pay you that money, to lay out at yourirresponsible discretion for your friend. I keep no money here; but if youwould rather Mr. Jaggers knew nothing of the matter, I will send it to you."
"Thank you, Miss Havisham; I have not the least objection to receiving it fromhim."
She read me what she had written; and it was direct and clear, and evidentlyintended to absolve me from any suspicion of profiting by the receipt of themoney. I took the tablets from her hand, and it trembled again, and it trembledmore as she took off the chain to which the pencil was attached, and put it inmine. All this she did without looking at me.
"My name is on the first leaf. If you can ever write under my name, "I forgiveher," though ever so long after my broken heart is dust pray do it!"
"O Miss Havisham," said I, "I can do it now. There have been sore mistakes; andmy life has been a blind and thankless one; and I want forgiveness anddirection far too much, to be bitter with you."
She turned her face to me for the first time since she had averted it, and, tomy amazement, I may even add to my terror, dropped on her knees at my feet;with her folded hands raised to me in the manner in which, when her poor heartwas young and fresh and whole, they must often have been raised to heaven fromher mother's side.
To see her with her white hair and her worn face kneeling at my feet gave me ashock through all my frame. I entreated her to rise, and got my arms about herto help her up; but she only pressed that hand of mine which was nearest to hergrasp, and hung her head over it and wept. I had never seen her shed a tearbefore, and, in the hope that the relief might do her good, I bent over herwithout speaking. She was not kneeling now, but was down upon the ground.
"O!" she cried, despairingly. "What have I done! What have I done!"
"If you mean, Miss Havisham, what have you done to injure me, let me answer.Very little. I should have loved her under any circumstances. Is she married?"
"Yes."
It was a needless question, for a new desolation in the desolate house had toldme so.
"What have I done! What have I done!" She wrung her hands, and crushed herwhite hair, and returned to this cry over and over again. "What have I done!"
I knew not how to answer, or how to comfort her. That she had done a grievousthing in taking an impressionable child to mould into the form that her wildresentment, spurned affection, and wounded pride found vengeance in, I knewfull well. But that, in shutting out the light of day, she had shut outinfinitely more; that, in seclusion, she had secluded herself from a thousandnatural and healing influences; that, her mind, brooding solitary, had growndiseased, as all minds do and must and will that reverse the appointed order oftheir Maker, I knew equally well. And could I look upon her without compassion,seeing her punishment in the ruin she was, in her profound unfitness for thisearth on which she was placed, in the vanity of sorrow which had become amaster mania, like the vanity of penitence, the vanity of remorse, the vanityof unworthiness, and other monstrous vanities that have been curses in thisworld?
"Until you spoke to her the other day, and until I saw in you a looking-glassthat showed me what I once felt myself, I did not know what I had done. Whathave I done! What have I done!" And so again, twenty, fifty times over, Whathad she done!
"Miss Havisham," I said, when her cry had died away, "you may dismiss me fromyour mind and conscience. But Estella is a different case, and if you can everundo any scrap of what you have done amiss in keeping a part of her rightnature away from her, it will be better to do that than to bemoan the pastthrough a hundred years."
"Yes, yes, I know it. But, Pip—my dear!" There was an earnest womanlycompassion for me in her new affection. "My dear! Believe this: when she firstcame to me, I meant to save her from misery like my own. At first, I meant nomore."
"Well, well!" said I. "I hope so."
"But as she grew, and promised to be very beautiful, I gradually did worse, andwith my praises, and with my jewels, and with my teachings, and with thisfigure of myself always before her, a warning to back and point my lessons, Istole her heart away, and put ice in its place."
"Better," I could not help saying, "to have left her a natural heart, even tobe bruised or broken."
With that, Miss Havisham looked distractedly at me for a while, and then burstout again, What had she done!
"If you knew all my story," she pleaded, "you would have some compassion for meand a better understanding of me."
"Miss Havisham," I answered, as delicately as I could, "I believe I may saythat I do know your story, and have known it ever since I first left thisneighbourhood. It has inspired me with great commiseration, and I hope Iunderstand it and its influences. Does what has passed between us give me anyexcuse for asking you a question relative to Estella? Not as she is, but as shewas when she first came here?"
She was seated on the ground, with her arms on the ragged chair, and her headleaning on them. She looked full at me when I said this, and replied, "Go on."
"Whose child was Estella?"
She shook her head.
"You don't know?"
She shook her head again.
"But Mr. Jaggers brought her here, or sent her here?"
"Brought her here."
"Will you tell me how that came about?"
She answered in a low whisper and with caution: "I had been shut up in theserooms a long time (I don't know how long; you know what time the clocks keephere), when I told him that I wanted a little girl to rear and love, and savefrom my fate. I had first seen him when I sent for him to lay this place wastefor me; having read of him in the newspapers, before I and the world parted. Hetold me that he would look about him for such an orphan child. One night hebrought her here asleep, and I called her Estella."
"Might I ask her age then?"
"Two or three. She herself knows nothing, but that she was left an orphan and Iadopted her."
So convinced I was of that woman's being her mother, that I wanted no evidenceto establish the fact in my own mind. But, to any mind, I thought, theconnection here was clear and straight.
What more could I hope to do by prolonging the interview? I had succeeded onbehalf of Herbert, Miss Havisham had told me all she knew of Estella, I hadsaid and done what I could to ease her mind. No matter with what other words weparted; we parted.
Twilight was closing in when I went downstairs into the natural air. I calledto the woman who had opened the gate when I entered, that I would not troubleher just yet, but would walk round the place before leaving. For I had apresentiment that I should never be there again, and I felt that the dyinglight was suited to my last view of it.
By the wilderness of casks that I had walked on long ago, and on which the rainof years had fallen since, rotting them in many places, and leaving miniatureswamps and pools of water upon those that stood on end, I made my way to theruined garden. I went all round it; round by the corner where Herbert and I hadfought our battle; round by the paths where Estella and I had walked. So cold,so lonely, so dreary all!
Taking the brewery on my way back, I raised the rusty latch of a little door atthe garden end of it, and walked through. I was going out at the oppositedoor,—not easy to open now, for the damp wood had started and swelled, and thehinges were yielding, and the threshold was encumbered with a growth offungus,—when I turned my head to look back. A childish association revived withwonderful force in the moment of the slight action, and I fancied that I sawMiss Havisham hanging to the beam. So strong was the impression, that I stoodunder the beam shuddering from head to foot before I knew it was afancy,—though to be sure I was there in an instant.
The mournfulness of the place and time, and the great terror of this illusion,though it was but momentary, caused me to feel an indescribable awe as I cameout between the open wooden gates where I had once wrung my hair after Estellahad wrung my heart. Passing on into the front courtyard, I hesitated whether tocall the woman to let me out at the locked gate of which she had the key, orfirst to go upstairs and assure myself that Miss Havisham was as safe and wellas I had left her. I took the latter course and went up.
I looked into the room where I had left her, and I saw her seated in the raggedchair upon the hearth close to the fire, with her back towards me. In themoment when I was withdrawing my head to go quietly away, I saw a great flaminglight spring up. In the same moment I saw her running at me, shrieking, with awhirl of fire blazing all about her, and soaring at least as many feet aboveher head as she was high.
I had a double-caped great-coat on, and over my arm another thick coat. That Igot them off, closed with her, threw her down, and got them over her; that Idragged the great cloth from the table for the same purpose, and with itdragged down the heap of rottenness in the midst, and all the ugly things thatsheltered there; that we were on the ground struggling like desperate enemies,and that the closer I covered her, the more wildly she shrieked and tried tofree herself,—that this occurred I knew through the result, but not throughanything I felt, or thought, or knew I did. I knew nothing until I knew that wewere on the floor by the great table, and that patches of tinder yet alightwere floating in the smoky air, which, a moment ago, had been her faded bridaldress.
Then, I looked round and saw the disturbed beetles and spiders running awayover the floor, and the servants coming in with breathless cries at the door. Istill held her forcibly down with all my strength, like a prisoner who mightescape; and I doubt if I even knew who she was, or why we had struggled, orthat she had been in flames, or that the flames were out, until I saw thepatches of tinder that had been her garments no longer alight but falling in ablack shower around us.
She was insensible, and I was afraid to have her moved, or even touched.Assistance was sent for, and I held her until it came, as if I unreasonablyfancied (I think I did) that, if I let her go, the fire would break out againand consume her. When I got up, on the surgeon's coming to her with other aid,I was astonished to see that both my hands were burnt; for, I had no knowledgeof it through the sense of feeling.
On examination it was pronounced that she had received serious hurts, but thatthey of themselves were far from hopeless; the danger lay mainly in the nervousshock. By the surgeon's directions, her bed was carried into that room and laidupon the great table, which happened to be well suited to the dressing of herinjuries. When I saw her again, an hour afterwards, she lay, indeed, where Ihad seen her strike her stick, and had heard her say that she would lie oneday.
Though every vestige of her dress was burnt, as they told me, she still hadsomething of her old ghastly bridal appearance; for, they had covered her tothe throat with white cotton-wool, and as she lay with a white sheet looselyoverlying that, the phantom air of something that had been and was changed wasstill upon her.
I found, on questioning the servants, that Estella was in Paris, and I got apromise from the surgeon that he would write to her by the next post. MissHavisham's family I took upon myself; intending to communicate with Mr. MatthewPocket only, and leave him to do as he liked about informing the rest. This Idid next day, through Herbert, as soon as I returned to town.
There was a stage, that evening, when she spoke collectedly of what hadhappened, though with a certain terrible vivacity. Towards midnight she beganto wander in her speech; and after that it gradually set in that she saidinnumerable times in a low solemn voice, "What have I done!" And then, "Whenshe first came, I meant to save her from misery like mine." And then, "Take thepencil and write under my name, ‘I forgive her!'" She never changed the orderof these three sentences, but she sometimes left out a word in one or other ofthem; never putting in another word, but always leaving a blank and going on tothe next word.
As I could do no service there, and as I had, nearer home, that pressing reasonfor anxiety and fear which even her wanderings could not drive out of my mind,I decided, in the course of the night that I would return by the early morningcoach, walking on a mile or so, and being taken up clear of the town. At aboutsix o'clock of the morning, therefore, I leaned over her and touched her lipswith mine, just as they said, not stopping for being touched, "Take the penciland write under my name, ‘I forgive her.'"
