
Chapter V.
Theapparition of a file of soldiers ringing down the but-ends of their loadedmuskets on our door-step, caused the dinner-party to rise from table inconfusion, and caused Mrs. Joe re-entering the kitchen empty-handed, to stopshort and stare, in her wondering lament of "Gracious goodness gracious me,what's gone—with the—pie!"
The sergeant and I were in the kitchen when Mrs. Joe stood staring; at whichcrisis I partially recovered the use of my senses. It was the sergeant who hadspoken to me, and he was now looking round at the company, with his handcuffsinvitingly extended towards them in his right hand, and his left on myshoulder.
"Excuse me, ladies and gentleman," said the sergeant, "but as I have mentionedat the door to this smart young shaver," (which he hadn't), "I am on a chase inthe name of the king, and I want the blacksmith."
"And pray what might you want with him?" retorted my sister, quick toresent his being wanted at all.
"Missis," returned the gallant sergeant, "speaking for myself, I should reply,the honour and pleasure of his fine wife's acquaintance; speaking for the king,I answer, a little job done."
This was received as rather neat in the sergeant; insomuch that Mr. Pumblechookcried audibly, "Good again!"
"You see, blacksmith," said the sergeant, who had by this time picked out Joewith his eye, "we have had an accident with these, and I find the lock of oneof 'em goes wrong, and the coupling don't act pretty. As they are wanted forimmediate service, will you throw your eye over them?"
Joe threw his eye over them, and pronounced that the job would necessitate thelighting of his forge fire, and would take nearer two hours than one. "Will it?Then will you set about it at once, blacksmith?" said the off-hand sergeant,"as it's on his Majesty's service. And if my men can bear a hand anywhere,they'll make themselves useful." With that, he called to his men, who cametrooping into the kitchen one after another, and piled their arms in a corner.And then they stood about, as soldiers do; now, with their hands looselyclasped before them; now, resting a knee or a shoulder; now, easing a belt or apouch; now, opening the door to spit stiffly over their high stocks, out intothe yard.
All these things I saw without then knowing that I saw them, for I was in anagony of apprehension. But beginning to perceive that the handcuffs were notfor me, and that the military had so far got the better of the pie as to put itin the background, I collected a little more of my scattered wits.
"Would you give me the time?" said the sergeant, addressing himself to Mr.Pumblechook, as to a man whose appreciative powers justified the inference thathe was equal to the time.
"It's just gone half past two."
"That's not so bad," said the sergeant, reflecting; "even if I was forced tohalt here nigh two hours, that'll do. How far might you call yourselves fromthe marshes, hereabouts? Not above a mile, I reckon?"
"Just a mile," said Mrs. Joe.
"That'll do. We begin to close in upon 'em about dusk. A little before dusk, myorders are. That'll do."
"Convicts, sergeant?" asked Mr. Wopsle, in a matter-of-course way.
"Ay!" returned the sergeant, "two. They're pretty well known to be out on themarshes still, and they won't try to get clear of 'em before dusk. Anybody hereseen anything of any such game?"
Everybody, myself excepted, said no, with confidence. Nobody thought of me.
"Well!" said the sergeant, "they'll find themselves trapped in a circle, Iexpect, sooner than they count on. Now, blacksmith! If you're ready, hisMajesty the King is."
Joe had got his coat and waistcoat and cravat off, and his leather apron on,and passed into the forge. One of the soldiers opened its wooden windows,another lighted the fire, another turned to at the bellows, the rest stoodround the blaze, which was soon roaring. Then Joe began to hammer and clink,hammer and clink, and we all looked on.
The interest of the impending pursuit not only absorbed the general attention,but even made my sister liberal. She drew a pitcher of beer from the cask forthe soldiers, and invited the sergeant to take a glass of brandy. But Mr.Pumblechook said, sharply, "Give him wine, Mum. I'll engage there's no tar inthat:" so, the sergeant thanked him and said that as he preferred his drinkwithout tar, he would take wine, if it was equally convenient. When it wasgiven him, he drank his Majesty's health and compliments of the season, andtook it all at a mouthful and smacked his lips.
"Good stuff, eh, sergeant?" said Mr. Pumblechook.
"I'll tell you something," returned the sergeant; "I suspect that stuff's ofyour providing."
Mr. Pumblechook, with a fat sort of laugh, said, "Ay, ay? Why?"
"Because," returned the sergeant, clapping him on the shoulder, "you're a manthat knows what's what."
"D'ye think so?" said Mr. Pumblechook, with his former laugh. "Have anotherglass!"
"With you. Hob and nob," returned the sergeant. "The top of mine to the foot ofyours,—the foot of yours to the top of mine,—Ring once, ring twice,—the besttune on the Musical Glasses! Your health. May you live a thousand years, andnever be a worse judge of the right sort than you are at the present moment ofyour life!"
The sergeant tossed off his glass again and seemed quite ready for anotherglass. I noticed that Mr. Pumblechook in his hospitality appeared to forgetthat he had made a present of the wine, but took the bottle from Mrs. Joe andhad all the credit of handing it about in a gush of joviality. Even I got some.And he was so very free of the wine that he even called for the other bottle,and handed that about with the same liberality, when the first was gone.
As I watched them while they all stood clustering about the forge, enjoyingthemselves so much, I thought what terrible good sauce for a dinner my fugitivefriend on the marshes was. They had not enjoyed themselves a quarter so much,before the entertainment was brightened with the excitement he furnished. Andnow, when they were all in lively anticipation of "the two villains" beingtaken, and when the bellows seemed to roar for the fugitives, the fire to flarefor them, the smoke to hurry away in pursuit of them, Joe to hammer and clinkfor them, and all the murky shadows on the wall to shake at them in menace asthe blaze rose and sank, and the red-hot sparks dropped and died, the paleafternoon outside almost seemed in my pitying young fancy to have turned paleon their account, poor wretches.
At last, Joe's job was done, and the ringing and roaring stopped. As Joe got onhis coat, he mustered courage to propose that some of us should go down withthe soldiers and see what came of the hunt. Mr. Pumblechook and Mr. Hubbledeclined, on the plea of a pipe and ladies' society; but Mr. Wopsle said hewould go, if Joe would. Joe said he was agreeable, and would take me, if Mrs.Joe approved. We never should have got leave to go, I am sure, but for Mrs.Joe's curiosity to know all about it and how it ended. As it was, she merelystipulated, "If you bring the boy back with his head blown to bits by a musket,don't look to me to put it together again."
The sergeant took a polite leave of the ladies, and parted from Mr. Pumblechookas from a comrade; though I doubt if he were quite as fully sensible of thatgentleman's merits under arid conditions, as when something moist was going.His men resumed their muskets and fell in. Mr. Wopsle, Joe, and I, receivedstrict charge to keep in the rear, and to speak no word after we reached themarshes. When we were all out in the raw air and were steadily moving towardsour business, I treasonably whispered to Joe, "I hope, Joe, we shan't findthem." and Joe whispered to me, "I'd give a shilling if they had cut and run,Pip."
We were joined by no stragglers from the village, for the weather was cold andthreatening, the way dreary, the footing bad, darkness coming on, and thepeople had good fires in-doors and were keeping the day. A few faces hurried toglowing windows and looked after us, but none came out. We passed thefinger-post, and held straight on to the churchyard. There we were stopped afew minutes by a signal from the sergeant's hand, while two or three of his mendispersed themselves among the graves, and also examined the porch. They camein again without finding anything, and then we struck out on the open marshes,through the gate at the side of the churchyard. A bitter sleet came rattlingagainst us here on the east wind, and Joe took me on his back.
Now that we were out upon the dismal wilderness where they little thought I hadbeen within eight or nine hours and had seen both men hiding, I considered forthe first time, with great dread, if we should come upon them, would myparticular convict suppose that it was I who had brought the soldiers there? Hehad asked me if I was a deceiving imp, and he had said I should be a fierceyoung hound if I joined the hunt against him. Would he believe that I was bothimp and hound in treacherous earnest, and had betrayed him?
It was of no use asking myself this question now. There I was, on Joe's back,and there was Joe beneath me, charging at the ditches like a hunter, andstimulating Mr. Wopsle not to tumble on his Roman nose, and to keep up with us.The soldiers were in front of us, extending into a pretty wide line with aninterval between man and man. We were taking the course I had begun with, andfrom which I had diverged in the mist. Either the mist was not out again yet,or the wind had dispelled it. Under the low red glare of sunset, the beacon,and the gibbet, and the mound of the Battery, and the opposite shore of theriver, were plain, though all of a watery lead colour.
With my heart thumping like a blacksmith at Joe's broad shoulder, I looked allabout for any sign of the convicts. I could see none, I could hear none. Mr.Wopsle had greatly alarmed me more than once, by his blowing and hardbreathing; but I knew the sounds by this time, and could dissociate them fromthe object of pursuit. I got a dreadful start, when I thought I heard the filestill going; but it was only a sheep-bell. The sheep stopped in their eatingand looked timidly at us; and the cattle, their heads turned from the wind andsleet, stared angrily as if they held us responsible for both annoyances; but,except these things, and the shudder of the dying day in every blade of grass,there was no break in the bleak stillness of the marshes.
The soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old Battery, and we weremoving on a little way behind them, when, all of a sudden, we all stopped. Forthere had reached us on the wings of the wind and rain, a long shout. It wasrepeated. It was at a distance towards the east, but it was long and loud. Nay,there seemed to be two or more shouts raised together,—if one might judge froma confusion in the sound.
To this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking under theirbreath, when Joe and I came up. After another moment's listening, Joe (who wasa good judge) agreed, and Mr. Wopsle (who was a bad judge) agreed. Thesergeant, a decisive man, ordered that the sound should not be answered, butthat the course should be changed, and that his men should make towards it "atthe double." So we slanted to the right (where the East was), and Joe poundedaway so wonderfully, that I had to hold on tight to keep my seat.
It was a run indeed now, and what Joe called, in the only two words he spokeall the time, "a Winder." Down banks and up banks, and over gates, andsplashing into dikes, and breaking among coarse rushes: no man cared where hewent. As we came nearer to the shouting, it became more and more apparent thatit was made by more than one voice. Sometimes, it seemed to stop altogether,and then the soldiers stopped. When it broke out again, the soldiers made forit at a greater rate than ever, and we after them. After a while, we had so runit down, that we could hear one voice calling "Murder!" and another voice,"Convicts! Runaways! Guard! This way for the runaway convicts!" Then bothvoices would seem to be stifled in a struggle, and then would break out again.And when it had come to this, the soldiers ran like deer, and Joe too.
The sergeant ran in first, when we had run the noise quite down, and two of hismen ran in close upon him. Their pieces were cocked and levelled when we allran in.
"Here are both men!" panted the sergeant, struggling at the bottom of a ditch."Surrender, you two! and confound you for two wild beasts! Come asunder!"
Water was splashing, and mud was flying, and oaths were being sworn, and blowswere being struck, when some more men went down into the ditch to help thesergeant, and dragged out, separately, my convict and the other one. Both werebleeding and panting and execrating and struggling; but of course I knew themboth directly.
"Mind!" said my convict, wiping blood from his face with his ragged sleeves,and shaking torn hair from his fingers: "I took him! I give himup to you! Mind that!"
"It's not much to be particular about," said the sergeant; "it'll do you smallgood, my man, being in the same plight yourself. Handcuffs there!"
"I don't expect it to do me any good. I don't want it to do me more good thanit does now," said my convict, with a greedy laugh. "I took him. He knows it.That's enough for me."
The other convict was livid to look at, and, in addition to the old bruisedleft side of his face, seemed to be bruised and torn all over. He could not somuch as get his breath to speak, until they were both separately handcuffed,but leaned upon a soldier to keep himself from falling.
"Take notice, guard,—he tried to murder me," were his first words.
"Tried to murder him?" said my convict, disdainfully. "Try, and not do it? Itook him, and giv' him up; that's what I done. I not only prevented him gettingoff the marshes, but I dragged him here,—dragged him this far on his way back.He's a gentleman, if you please, this villain. Now, the Hulks has got itsgentleman again, through me. Murder him? Worth my while, too, to murder him,when I could do worse and drag him back!"
The other one still gasped, "He tried—he tried-to—murder me. Bear—bearwitness."
"Lookee here!" said my convict to the sergeant. "Single-handed I got clear ofthe prison-ship; I made a dash and I done it. I could ha' got clear of thesedeath-cold flats likewise—look at my leg: you won't find much iron on it—if Ihadn't made the discovery that he was here. Let him go free? Lethim profit by the means as I found out? Let him make a tool of meafresh and again? Once more? No, no, no. If I had died at the bottom there,"and he made an emphatic swing at the ditch with his manacled hands, "I'd haveheld to him with that grip, that you should have been safe to find him in myhold."
The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion,repeated, "He tried to murder me. I should have been a dead man if you had notcome up."
"He lies!" said my convict, with fierce energy. "He's a liar born, and he'lldie a liar. Look at his face; ain't it written there? Let him turn those eyesof his on me. I defy him to do it."
The other, with an effort at a scornful smile, which could not, however,collect the nervous working of his mouth into any set expression, looked at thesoldiers, and looked about at the marshes and at the sky, but certainly did notlook at the speaker.
"Do you see him?" pursued my convict. "Do you see what a villain he is? Do yousee those grovelling and wandering eyes? That's how he looked when we weretried together. He never looked at me."
The other, always working and working his dry lips and turning his eyesrestlessly about him far and near, did at last turn them for a moment on thespeaker, with the words, "You are not much to look at," and with ahalf-taunting glance at the bound hands. At that point, my convict became sofrantically exasperated, that he would have rushed upon him but for theinterposition of the soldiers. "Didn't I tell you," said the other convictthen, "that he would murder me, if he could?" And any one could see that heshook with fear, and that there broke out upon his lips curious white flakes,like thin snow.
"Enough of this parley," said the sergeant. "Light those torches."
As one of the soldiers, who carried a basket in lieu of a gun, went down on hisknee to open it, my convict looked round him for the first time, and saw me. Ihad alighted from Joe's back on the brink of the ditch when we came up, and hadnot moved since. I looked at him eagerly when he looked at me, and slightlymoved my hands and shook my head. I had been waiting for him to see me that Imight try to assure him of my innocence. It was not at all expressed to me thathe even comprehended my intention, for he gave me a look that I did notunderstand, and it all passed in a moment. But if he had looked at me for anhour or for a day, I could not have remembered his face ever afterwards, ashaving been more attentive.
The soldier with the basket soon got a light, and lighted three or fourtorches, and took one himself and distributed the others. It had been almostdark before, but now it seemed quite dark, and soon afterwards very dark.Before we departed from that spot, four soldiers standing in a ring, firedtwice into the air. Presently we saw other torches kindled at some distancebehind us, and others on the marshes on the opposite bank of the river. "Allright," said the sergeant. "March."
We had not gone far when three cannon were fired ahead of us with a sound thatseemed to burst something inside my ear. "You are expected on board," said thesergeant to my convict; "they know you are coming. Don't straggle, my man.Close up here."
The two were kept apart, and each walked surrounded by a separate guard. I hadhold of Joe's hand now, and Joe carried one of the torches. Mr. Wopsle had beenfor going back, but Joe was resolved to see it out, so we went on with theparty. There was a reasonably good path now, mostly on the edge of the river,with a divergence here and there where a dike came, with a miniature windmillon it and a muddy sluice-gate. When I looked round, I could see the otherlights coming in after us. The torches we carried dropped great blotches offire upon the track, and I could see those, too, lying smoking and flaring. Icould see nothing else but black darkness. Our lights warmed the air about uswith their pitchy blaze, and the two prisoners seemed rather to like that, asthey limped along in the midst of the muskets. We could not go fast, because oftheir lameness; and they were so spent, that two or three times we had to haltwhile they rested.
After an hour or so of this travelling, we came to a rough wooden hut and alanding-place. There was a guard in the hut, and they challenged, and thesergeant answered. Then, we went into the hut, where there was a smell oftobacco and whitewash, and a bright fire, and a lamp, and a stand of muskets,and a drum, and a low wooden bedstead, like an overgrown mangle without themachinery, capable of holding about a dozen soldiers all at once. Three or foursoldiers who lay upon it in their great-coats were not much interested in us,but just lifted their heads and took a sleepy stare, and then lay down again.The sergeant made some kind of report, and some entry in a book, and then theconvict whom I call the other convict was drafted off with his guard, to go onboard first.
My convict never looked at me, except that once. While we stood in the hut, hestood before the fire looking thoughtfully at it, or putting up his feet byturns upon the hob, and looking thoughtfully at them as if he pitied them fortheir recent adventures. Suddenly, he turned to the sergeant, and remarked,—
"I wish to say something respecting this escape. It may prevent some personslaying under suspicion alonger me."
"You can say what you like," returned the sergeant, standing coolly looking athim with his arms folded, "but you have no call to say it here. You'll haveopportunity enough to say about it, and hear about it, before it's done with,you know."
"I know, but this is another pint, a separate matter. A man can't starve; atleast I can't. I took some wittles, up at the willage over yonder,—wherethe church stands a'most out on the marshes."
"You mean stole," said the sergeant.
"And I'll tell you where from. From the blacksmith's."
"Halloa!" said the sergeant, staring at Joe.
"Halloa, Pip!" said Joe, staring at me.
"It was some broken wittles—that's what it was—and a dram of liquor, and apie."
"Have you happened to miss such an article as a pie, blacksmith?" asked thesergeant, confidentially.
"My wife did, at the very moment when you came in. Don't you know, Pip?"
"So," said my convict, turning his eyes on Joe in a moody manner, and withoutthe least glance at me,—"so you're the blacksmith, are you? Than I'm sorry tosay, I've eat your pie."
"God knows you're welcome to it,—so far as it was ever mine," returned Joe,with a saving remembrance of Mrs. Joe. "We don't know what you have done, butwe wouldn't have you starved to death for it, poor miserablefellow-creatur.—Would us, Pip?"
The something that I had noticed before, clicked in the man's throat again, andhe turned his back. The boat had returned, and his guard were ready, so wefollowed him to the landing-place made of rough stakes and stones, and saw himput into the boat, which was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself. No oneseemed surprised to see him, or interested in seeing him, or glad to see him,or sorry to see him, or spoke a word, except that somebody in the boat growledas if to dogs, "Give way, you!" which was the signal for the dip of the oars.By the light of the torches, we saw the black Hulk lying out a little way fromthe mud of the shore, like a wicked Noah's ark. Cribbed and barred and mooredby massive rusty chains, the prison-ship seemed in my young eyes to be ironedlike the prisoners. We saw the boat go alongside, and we saw him taken up theside and disappear. Then, the ends of the torches were flung hissing into thewater, and went out, as if it were all over with him.
