
Chapter L.
Myhands had been dressed twice or thrice in the night, and again in the morning.My left arm was a good deal burned to the elbow, and, less severely, as high asthe shoulder; it was very painful, but the flames had set in that direction,and I felt thankful it was no worse. My right hand was not so badly burnt butthat I could move the fingers. It was bandaged, of course, but much lessinconveniently than my left hand and arm; those I carried in a sling; and Icould only wear my coat like a cloak, loose over my shoulders and fastened atthe neck. My hair had been caught by the fire, but not my head or face.
When Herbert had been down to Hammersmith and seen his father, he came back tome at our chambers, and devoted the day to attending on me. He was the kindestof nurses, and at stated times took off the bandages, and steeped them in thecooling liquid that was kept ready, and put them on again, with a patienttenderness that I was deeply grateful for.
At first, as I lay quiet on the sofa, I found it painfully difficult, I mightsay impossible, to get rid of the impression of the glare of the flames, theirhurry and noise, and the fierce burning smell. If I dozed for a minute, I wasawakened by Miss Havisham's cries, and by her running at me with all thatheight of fire above her head. This pain of the mind was much harder to striveagainst than any bodily pain I suffered; and Herbert, seeing that, did hisutmost to hold my attention engaged.
Neither of us spoke of the boat, but we both thought of it. That was madeapparent by our avoidance of the subject, and by our agreeing—withoutagreement—to make my recovery of the use of my hands a question of so manyhours, not of so many weeks.
My first question when I saw Herbert had been of course, whether all was welldown the river? As he replied in the affirmative, with perfect confidence andcheerfulness, we did not resume the subject until the day was wearing away. Butthen, as Herbert changed the bandages, more by the light of the fire than bythe outer light, he went back to it spontaneously.
"I sat with Provis last night, Handel, two good hours."
"Where was Clara?"
"Dear little thing!" said Herbert. "She was up and down with Gruffandgrim allthe evening. He was perpetually pegging at the floor the moment she left hissight. I doubt if he can hold out long, though. What with rum and pepper,—andpepper and rum,—I should think his pegging must be nearly over."
"And then you will be married, Herbert?"
"How can I take care of the dear child otherwise?—Lay your arm out upon theback of the sofa, my dear boy, and I'll sit down here, and get the bandage offso gradually that you shall not know when it comes. I was speaking of Provis.Do you know, Handel, he improves?"
"I said to you I thought he was softened when I last saw him."
"So you did. And so he is. He was very communicative last night, and told memore of his life. You remember his breaking off here about some woman that hehad had great trouble with.—Did I hurt you?"
I had started, but not under his touch. His words had given me a start.
"I had forgotten that, Herbert, but I remember it now you speak of it."
"Well! He went into that part of his life, and a dark wild part it is. Shall Itell you? Or would it worry you just now?"
"Tell me by all means. Every word."
Herbert bent forward to look at me more nearly, as if my reply had been rathermore hurried or more eager than he could quite account for. "Your head iscool?" he said, touching it.
"Quite," said I. "Tell me what Provis said, my dear Herbert."
"It seems," said Herbert, "—there's a bandage off most charmingly, and nowcomes the cool one,—makes you shrink at first, my poor dear fellow, don't it?but it will be comfortable presently,—it seems that the woman was a youngwoman, and a jealous woman, and a revengeful woman; revengeful, Handel, to thelast degree."
"To what last degree?"
"Murder.—Does it strike too cold on that sensitive place?"
"I don't feel it. How did she murder? Whom did she murder?"
"Why, the deed may not have merited quite so terrible a name," said Herbert,"but, she was tried for it, and Mr. Jaggers defended her, and the reputation ofthat defence first made his name known to Provis. It was another and a strongerwoman who was the victim, and there had been a struggle—in a barn. Who beganit, or how fair it was, or how unfair, may be doubtful; but how it ended iscertainly not doubtful, for the victim was found throttled."
"Was the woman brought in guilty?"
"No; she was acquitted.—My poor Handel, I hurt you!"
"It is impossible to be gentler, Herbert. Yes? What else?"
"This acquitted young woman and Provis had a little child; a little child ofwhom Provis was exceedingly fond. On the evening of the very night when theobject of her jealousy was strangled as I tell you, the young woman presentedherself before Provis for one moment, and swore that she would destroy thechild (which was in her possession), and he should never see it again; then shevanished.—There's the worst arm comfortably in the sling once more, and nowthere remains but the right hand, which is a far easier job. I can do it betterby this light than by a stronger, for my hand is steadiest when I don't see thepoor blistered patches too distinctly.—You don't think your breathing isaffected, my dear boy? You seem to breathe quickly."
"Perhaps I do, Herbert. Did the woman keep her oath?"
"There comes the darkest part of Provis's life. She did."
"That is, he says she did."
"Why, of course, my dear boy," returned Herbert, in a tone of surprise, andagain bending forward to get a nearer look at me. "He says it all. I have noother information."
"No, to be sure."
"Now, whether," pursued Herbert, "he had used the child's mother ill, orwhether he had used the child's mother well, Provis doesn't say; but she hadshared some four or five years of the wretched life he described to us at thisfireside, and he seems to have felt pity for her, and forbearance towards her.Therefore, fearing he should be called upon to depose about this destroyedchild, and so be the cause of her death, he hid himself (much as he grieved forthe child), kept himself dark, as he says, out of the way and out of the trial,and was only vaguely talked of as a certain man called Abel, out of whom thejealousy arose. After the acquittal she disappeared, and thus he lost the childand the child's mother."
"I want to ask—"
"A moment, my dear boy, and I have done. That evil genius, Compeyson, the worstof scoundrels among many scoundrels, knowing of his keeping out of the way atthat time and of his reasons for doing so, of course afterwards held theknowledge over his head as a means of keeping him poorer and working himharder. It was clear last night that this barbed the point of Provis'sanimosity."
"I want to know," said I, "and particularly, Herbert, whether he told you whenthis happened?"
"Particularly? Let me remember, then, what he said as to that. His expressionwas, ‘a round score o' year ago, and a'most directly after I took up wi'Compeyson.' How old were you when you came upon him in the little churchyard?"
"I think in my seventh year."
"Ay. It had happened some three or four years then, he said, and you broughtinto his mind the little girl so tragically lost, who would have been aboutyour age."
"Herbert," said I, after a short silence, in a hurried way, "can you see mebest by the light of the window, or the light of the fire?"
"By the firelight," answered Herbert, coming close again.
"Look at me."
"I do look at you, my dear boy."
"Touch me."
"I do touch you, my dear boy."
"You are not afraid that I am in any fever, or that my head is much disorderedby the accident of last night?"
"N-no, my dear boy," said Herbert, after taking time to examine me. "You arerather excited, but you are quite yourself."
"I know I am quite myself. And the man we have in hiding down the river, isEstella's Father."
