
Chapter LI.
Whatpurpose I had in view when I was hot on tracing out and proving Estella'sparentage, I cannot say. It will presently be seen that the question was notbefore me in a distinct shape until it was put before me by a wiser head thanmy own.
But when Herbert and I had held our momentous conversation, I was seized with afeverish conviction that I ought to hunt the matter down,—that I ought not tolet it rest, but that I ought to see Mr. Jaggers, and come at the bare truth. Ireally do not know whether I felt that I did this for Estella's sake, orwhether I was glad to transfer to the man in whose preservation I was so muchconcerned some rays of the romantic interest that had so long surrounded me.Perhaps the latter possibility may be the nearer to the truth.
Any way, I could scarcely be withheld from going out to Gerrard Street thatnight. Herbert's representations that, if I did, I should probably be laid upand stricken useless, when our fugitive's safety would depend upon me, alonerestrained my impatience. On the understanding, again and again reiterated,that, come what would, I was to go to Mr. Jaggers to-morrow, I at lengthsubmitted to keep quiet, and to have my hurts looked after, and to stay athome. Early next morning we went out together, and at the corner of GiltspurStreet by Smithfield, I left Herbert to go his way into the City, and took myway to Little Britain.
There were periodical occasions when Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick went over theoffice accounts, and checked off the vouchers, and put all things straight. Onthese occasions, Wemmick took his books and papers into Mr. Jaggers's room, andone of the upstairs clerks came down into the outer office. Finding such clerkon Wemmick's post that morning, I knew what was going on; but I was not sorryto have Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick together, as Wemmick would then hear forhimself that I said nothing to compromise him.
My appearance, with my arm bandaged and my coat loose over my shoulders,favoured my object. Although I had sent Mr. Jaggers a brief account of theaccident as soon as I had arrived in town, yet I had to give him all thedetails now; and the speciality of the occasion caused our talk to be less dryand hard, and less strictly regulated by the rules of evidence, than it hadbeen before. While I described the disaster, Mr. Jaggers stood, according tohis wont, before the fire. Wemmick leaned back in his chair, staring at me,with his hands in the pockets of his trousers, and his pen put horizontallyinto the post. The two brutal casts, always inseparable in my mind from theofficial proceedings, seemed to be congestively considering whether they didn'tsmell fire at the present moment.
My narrative finished, and their questions exhausted, I then produced MissHavisham's authority to receive the nine hundred pounds for Herbert. Mr.Jaggers's eyes retired a little deeper into his head when I handed him thetablets, but he presently handed them over to Wemmick, with instructions todraw the check for his signature. While that was in course of being done, Ilooked on at Wemmick as he wrote, and Mr. Jaggers, poising and swaying himselfon his well-polished boots, looked on at me. "I am sorry, Pip," said he, as Iput the check in my pocket, when he had signed it, "that we do nothing foryou."
"Miss Havisham was good enough to ask me," I returned, "whether she could donothing for me, and I told her No."
"Everybody should know his own business," said Mr. Jaggers. And I saw Wemmick'slips form the words "portable property."
"I should not have told her No, if I had been you," said Mr Jaggers;"but every man ought to know his own business best."
"Every man's business," said Wemmick, rather reproachfully towards me, "isportable property."
As I thought the time was now come for pursuing the theme I had at heart, Isaid, turning on Mr. Jaggers:—
"I did ask something of Miss Havisham, however, sir. I asked her to give mesome information relative to her adopted daughter, and she gave me all shepossessed."
"Did she?" said Mr. Jaggers, bending forward to look at his boots and thenstraightening himself. "Hah! I don't think I should have done so, if I had beenMiss Havisham. But she ought to know her own business best."
"I know more of the history of Miss Havisham's adopted child than Miss Havishamherself does, sir. I know her mother."
Mr. Jaggers looked at me inquiringly, and repeated "Mother?"
"I have seen her mother within these three days."
"Yes?" said Mr. Jaggers.
"And so have you, sir. And you have seen her still more recently."
"Yes?" said Mr. Jaggers.
"Perhaps I know more of Estella's history than even you do," said I. "I knowher father too."
A certain stop that Mr. Jaggers came to in his manner—he was too self-possessedto change his manner, but he could not help its being brought to an indefinablyattentive stop—assured me that he did not know who her father was. This I hadstrongly suspected from Provis's account (as Herbert had repeated it) of hishaving kept himself dark; which I pieced on to the fact that he himself was notMr. Jaggers's client until some four years later, and when he could have noreason for claiming his identity. But, I could not be sure of thisunconsciousness on Mr. Jaggers's part before, though I was quite sure of itnow.
"So! You know the young lady's father, Pip?" said Mr. Jaggers.
"Yes," I replied, "and his name is Provis—from New South Wales."
Even Mr. Jaggers started when I said those words. It was the slightest startthat could escape a man, the most carefully repressed and the sooner checked,but he did start, though he made it a part of the action of taking out hispocket-handkerchief. How Wemmick received the announcement I am unable to say;for I was afraid to look at him just then, lest Mr. Jaggers's sharpness shoulddetect that there had been some communication unknown to him between us.
"And on what evidence, Pip," asked Mr. Jaggers, very coolly, as he paused withhis handkerchief half way to his nose, "does Provis make this claim?"
"He does not make it," said I, "and has never made it, and has no knowledge orbelief that his daughter is in existence."
For once, the powerful pocket-handkerchief failed. My reply was so unexpected,that Mr. Jaggers put the handkerchief back into his pocket without completingthe usual performance, folded his arms, and looked with stern attention at me,though with an immovable face.
Then I told him all I knew, and how I knew it; with the one reservation that Ileft him to infer that I knew from Miss Havisham what I in fact knew fromWemmick. I was very careful indeed as to that. Nor did I look towards Wemmickuntil I had finished all I had to tell, and had been for some time silentlymeeting Mr. Jaggers's look. When I did at last turn my eyes in Wemmick'sdirection, I found that he had unposted his pen, and was intent upon the tablebefore him.
"Hah!" said Mr. Jaggers at last, as he moved towards the papers on the table."What item was it you were at, Wemmick, when Mr. Pip came in?"
But I could not submit to be thrown off in that way, and I made a passionate,almost an indignant appeal, to him to be more frank and manly with me. Ireminded him of the false hopes into which I had lapsed, the length of timethey had lasted, and the discovery I had made: and I hinted at the danger thatweighed upon my spirits. I represented myself as being surely worthy of somelittle confidence from him, in return for the confidence I had just nowimparted. I said that I did not blame him, or suspect him, or mistrust him, butI wanted assurance of the truth from him. And if he asked me why I wanted it,and why I thought I had any right to it, I would tell him, little as he caredfor such poor dreams, that I had loved Estella dearly and long, and thatalthough I had lost her, and must live a bereaved life, whatever concerned herwas still nearer and dearer to me than anything else in the world. And seeingthat Mr. Jaggers stood quite still and silent, and apparently quite obdurate,under this appeal, I turned to Wemmick, and said, "Wemmick, I know you to be aman with a gentle heart. I have seen your pleasant home, and your old father,and all the innocent, cheerful playful ways with which you refresh yourbusiness life. And I entreat you to say a word for me to Mr. Jaggers, and torepresent to him that, all circumstances considered, he ought to be more openwith me!"
I have never seen two men look more oddly at one another than Mr. Jaggers andWemmick did after this apostrophe. At first, a misgiving crossed me thatWemmick would be instantly dismissed from his employment; but it melted as Isaw Mr. Jaggers relax into something like a smile, and Wemmick become bolder.
"What's all this?" said Mr. Jaggers. "You with an old father, and you withpleasant and playful ways?"
"Well!" returned Wemmick. "If I don't bring 'em here, what does it matter?"
"Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, laying his hand upon my arm, and smiling openly, "thisman must be the most cunning impostor in all London."
"Not a bit of it," returned Wemmick, growing bolder and bolder. "I think you'reanother."
Again they exchanged their former odd looks, each apparently still distrustfulthat the other was taking him in.
"You with a pleasant home?" said Mr. Jaggers.
"Since it don't interfere with business," returned Wemmick, "let it be so. Now,I look at you, sir, I shouldn't wonder if you might be planning andcontriving to have a pleasant home of your own one of these days, when you'retired of all this work."
Mr. Jaggers nodded his head retrospectively two or three times, and actuallydrew a sigh. "Pip," said he, "we won't talk about ‘poor dreams;' you know moreabout such things than I, having much fresher experience of that kind. But nowabout this other matter. I'll put a case to you. Mind! I admit nothing."
He waited for me to declare that I quite understood that he expressly said thathe admitted nothing.
"Now, Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, "put this case. Put the case that a woman, undersuch circumstances as you have mentioned, held her child concealed, and wasobliged to communicate the fact to her legal adviser, on his representing toher that he must know, with an eye to the latitude of his defence, how the factstood about that child. Put the case that, at the same time he held a trust tofind a child for an eccentric rich lady to adopt and bring up."
"I follow you, sir."
"Put the case that he lived in an atmosphere of evil, and that all he saw ofchildren was their being generated in great numbers for certain destruction.Put the case that he often saw children solemnly tried at a criminal bar, wherethey were held up to be seen; put the case that he habitually knew of theirbeing imprisoned, whipped, transported, neglected, cast out, qualified in allways for the hangman, and growing up to be hanged. Put the case that prettynigh all the children he saw in his daily business life he had reason to lookupon as so much spawn, to develop into the fish that were to come to hisnet,—to be prosecuted, defended, forsworn, made orphans, bedevilled somehow."
"I follow you, sir."
"Put the case, Pip, that here was one pretty little child out of the heap whocould be saved; whom the father believed dead, and dared make no stir about; asto whom, over the mother, the legal adviser had this power: "I know what youdid, and how you did it. You came so and so, you did such and such things todivert suspicion. I have tracked you through it all, and I tell it you all.Part with the child, unless it should be necessary to produce it to clear you,and then it shall be produced. Give the child into my hands, and I will do mybest to bring you off. If you are saved, your child is saved too; if you arelost, your child is still saved." Put the case that this was done, and that thewoman was cleared."
"I understand you perfectly."
"But that I make no admissions?"
"That you make no admissions." And Wemmick repeated, "No admissions."
"Put the case, Pip, that passion and the terror of death had a little shakenthe woman's intellects, and that when she was set at liberty, she was scaredout of the ways of the world, and went to him to be sheltered. Put the casethat he took her in, and that he kept down the old, wild, violent naturewhenever he saw an inkling of its breaking out, by asserting his power over herin the old way. Do you comprehend the imaginary case?"
"Quite."
"Put the case that the child grew up, and was married for money. That themother was still living. That the father was still living. That the mother andfather, unknown to one another, were dwelling within so many miles, furlongs,yards if you like, of one another. That the secret was still a secret, exceptthat you had got wind of it. Put that last case to yourself very carefully."
"I do."
"I ask Wemmick to put it to himself very carefully."
And Wemmick said, "I do."
"For whose sake would you reveal the secret? For the father's? I think he wouldnot be much the better for the mother. For the mother's? I think if she haddone such a deed she would be safer where she was. For the daughter's? I thinkit would hardly serve her to establish her parentage for the information of herhusband, and to drag her back to disgrace, after an escape of twenty years,pretty secure to last for life. But add the case that you had loved her, Pip,and had made her the subject of those ‘poor dreams' which have, at one time oranother, been in the heads of more men than you think likely, then I tell youthat you had better—and would much sooner when you had thought well of it—chopoff that bandaged left hand of yours with your bandaged right hand, and thenpass the chopper on to Wemmick there, to cut that off too."
I looked at Wemmick, whose face was very grave. He gravely touched his lipswith his forefinger. I did the same. Mr. Jaggers did the same. "Now, Wemmick,"said the latter then, resuming his usual manner, "what item was it you were atwhen Mr. Pip came in?"
Standing by for a little, while they were at work, I observed that the oddlooks they had cast at one another were repeated several times: with thisdifference now, that each of them seemed suspicious, not to say conscious, ofhaving shown himself in a weak and unprofessional light to the other. For thisreason, I suppose, they were now inflexible with one another; Mr. Jaggers beinghighly dictatorial, and Wemmick obstinately justifying himself whenever therewas the smallest point in abeyance for a moment. I had never seen them on suchill terms; for generally they got on very well indeed together.
But they were both happily relieved by the opportune appearance of Mike, theclient with the fur cap and the habit of wiping his nose on his sleeve, whom Ihad seen on the very first day of my appearance within those walls. Thisindividual, who, either in his own person or in that of some member of hisfamily, seemed to be always in trouble (which in that place meant Newgate),called to announce that his eldest daughter was taken up on suspicion ofshoplifting. As he imparted this melancholy circumstance to Wemmick, Mr.Jaggers standing magisterially before the fire and taking no share in theproceedings, Mike's eye happened to twinkle with a tear.
"What are you about?" demanded Wemmick, with the utmost indignation. "What doyou come snivelling here for?"
"I didn't go to do it, Mr. Wemmick."
"You did," said Wemmick. "How dare you? You're not in a fit state to come here,if you can't come here without spluttering like a bad pen. What do you mean byit?"
"A man can't help his feelings, Mr. Wemmick," pleaded Mike.
"His what?" demanded Wemmick, quite savagely. "Say that again!"
"Now look here my man," said Mr. Jaggers, advancing a step, and pointing to thedoor. "Get out of this office. I'll have no feelings here. Get out."
"It serves you right," said Wemmick, "Get out."
So, the unfortunate Mike very humbly withdrew, and Mr. Jaggers and Wemmickappeared to have re-established their good understanding, and went to workagain with an air of refreshment upon them as if they had just had lunch.
