
Chapter LIII.
It wasa dark night, though the full moon rose as I left the enclosed lands, andpassed out upon the marshes. Beyond their dark line there was a ribbon of clearsky, hardly broad enough to hold the red large moon. In a few minutes she hadascended out of that clear field, in among the piled mountains of cloud.
There was a melancholy wind, and the marshes were very dismal. A stranger wouldhave found them insupportable, and even to me they were so oppressive that Ihesitated, half inclined to go back. But I knew them well, and could have foundmy way on a far darker night, and had no excuse for returning, being there. So,having come there against my inclination, I went on against it.
The direction that I took was not that in which my old home lay, nor that inwhich we had pursued the convicts. My back was turned towards the distant Hulksas I walked on, and, though I could see the old lights away on the spits ofsand, I saw them over my shoulder. I knew the limekiln as well as I knew theold Battery, but they were miles apart; so that, if a light had been burning ateach point that night, there would have been a long strip of the blank horizonbetween the two bright specks.
At first, I had to shut some gates after me, and now and then to stand stillwhile the cattle that were lying in the banked-up pathway arose and blundereddown among the grass and reeds. But after a little while I seemed to have thewhole flats to myself.
It was another half-hour before I drew near to the kiln. The lime was burningwith a sluggish stifling smell, but the fires were made up and left, and noworkmen were visible. Hard by was a small stone-quarry. It lay directly in myway, and had been worked that day, as I saw by the tools and barrows that werelying about.
Coming up again to the marsh level out of this excavation,—for the rude pathlay through it,—I saw a light in the old sluice-house. I quickened my pace, andknocked at the door with my hand. Waiting for some reply, I looked about me,noticing how the sluice was abandoned and broken, and how the house—of woodwith a tiled roof—would not be proof against the weather much longer, if itwere so even now, and how the mud and ooze were coated with lime, and how thechoking vapour of the kiln crept in a ghostly way towards me. Still there wasno answer, and I knocked again. No answer still, and I tried the latch.
It rose under my hand, and the door yielded. Looking in, I saw a lighted candleon a table, a bench, and a mattress on a truckle bedstead. As there was a loftabove, I called, "Is there any one here?" but no voice answered. Then I lookedat my watch, and, finding that it was past nine, called again, "Is there anyone here?" There being still no answer, I went out at the door, irresolute whatto do.
It was beginning to rain fast. Seeing nothing save what I had seen already, Iturned back into the house, and stood just within the shelter of the doorway,looking out into the night. While I was considering that some one must havebeen there lately and must soon be coming back, or the candle would not beburning, it came into my head to look if the wick were long. I turned round todo so, and had taken up the candle in my hand, when it was extinguished by someviolent shock; and the next thing I comprehended was, that I had been caught ina strong running noose, thrown over my head from behind.
"Now," said a suppressed voice with an oath, "I've got you!"
"What is this?" I cried, struggling. "Who is it? Help, help, help!"
Not only were my arms pulled close to my sides, but the pressure on my bad armcaused me exquisite pain. Sometimes, a strong man's hand, sometimes a strongman's breast, was set against my mouth to deaden my cries, and with a hotbreath always close to me, I struggled ineffectually in the dark, while I wasfastened tight to the wall. "And now," said the suppressed voice with anotheroath, "call out again, and I'll make short work of you!"
Faint and sick with the pain of my injured arm, bewildered by the surprise, andyet conscious how easily this threat could be put in execution, I desisted, andtried to ease my arm were it ever so little. But, it was bound too tight forthat. I felt as if, having been burnt before, it were now being boiled.
The sudden exclusion of the night, and the substitution of black darkness inits place, warned me that the man had closed a shutter. After groping about fora little, he found the flint and steel he wanted, and began to strike a light.I strained my sight upon the sparks that fell among the tinder, and upon whichhe breathed and breathed, match in hand, but I could only see his lips, and theblue point of the match; even those but fitfully. The tinder was damp,—nowonder there,—and one after another the sparks died out.
The man was in no hurry, and struck again with the flint and steel. As thesparks fell thick and bright about him, I could see his hands, and touches ofhis face, and could make out that he was seated and bending over the table; butnothing more. Presently I saw his blue lips again, breathing on the tinder, andthen a flare of light flashed up, and showed me Orlick.
Whom I had looked for, I don't know. I had not looked for him. Seeing him, Ifelt that I was in a dangerous strait indeed, and I kept my eyes upon him.
He lighted the candle from the flaring match with great deliberation, anddropped the match, and trod it out. Then he put the candle away from him on thetable, so that he could see me, and sat with his arms folded on the table andlooked at me. I made out that I was fastened to a stout perpendicular ladder afew inches from the wall,—a fixture there,—the means of ascent to the loftabove.
"Now," said he, when we had surveyed one another for some time, "I've got you."
"Unbind me. Let me go!"
"Ah!" he returned, "I'll let you go. I'll let you go to the moon, I'lllet you go to the stars. All in good time."
"Why have you lured me here?"
"Don't you know?" said he, with a deadly look.
"Why have you set upon me in the dark?"
"Because I mean to do it all myself. One keeps a secret better than two. O youenemy, you enemy!"
His enjoyment of the spectacle I furnished, as he sat with his arms folded onthe table, shaking his head at me and hugging himself, had a malignity in itthat made me tremble. As I watched him in silence, he put his hand into thecorner at his side, and took up a gun with a brass-bound stock.
"Do you know this?" said he, making as if he would take aim at me. "Do you knowwhere you saw it afore? Speak, wolf!"
"Yes," I answered.




"You cost me that place. You did. Speak!"
"What else could I do?"
"You did that, and that would be enough, without more. How dared you to comebetwixt me and a young woman I liked?"
"When did I?"
"When didn't you? It was you as always give Old Orlick a bad name to her."
"You gave it to yourself; you gained it for yourself. I could have done you noharm, if you had done yourself none."
"You're a liar. And you'll take any pains, and spend any money, to drive me outof this country, will you?" said he, repeating my words to Biddy in the lastinterview I had with her. "Now, I'll tell you a piece of information. It wasnever so well worth your while to get me out of this country as it is to-night.Ah! If it was all your money twenty times told, to the last brass farden!" Ashe shook his heavy hand at me, with his mouth snarling like a tiger's, I feltthat it was true.
"What are you going to do to me?"
"I'm a-going," said he, bringing his fist down upon the table with a heavyblow, and rising as the blow fell to give it greater force,—"I'm a-going tohave your life!"
He leaned forward staring at me, slowly unclenched his hand and drew it acrosshis mouth as if his mouth watered for me, and sat down again.
"You was always in Old Orlick's way since ever you was a child. You goes out ofhis way this present night. He'll have no more on you. You're dead."
I felt that I had come to the brink of my grave. For a moment I looked wildlyround my trap for any chance of escape; but there was none.
"More than that," said he, folding his arms on the table again, "I won't have arag of you, I won't have a bone of you, left on earth. I'll put your body inthe kiln,—I'd carry two such to it, on my shoulders—and, let people supposewhat they may of you, they shall never know nothing."
My mind, with inconceivable rapidity followed out all the consequences of sucha death. Estella's father would believe I had deserted him, would be taken,would die accusing me; even Herbert would doubt me, when he compared the letterI had left for him with the fact that I had called at Miss Havisham's gate foronly a moment; Joe and Biddy would never know how sorry I had been that night,none would ever know what I had suffered, how true I had meant to be, what anagony I had passed through. The death close before me was terrible, but farmore terrible than death was the dread of being misremembered after death. Andso quick were my thoughts, that I saw myself despised by unborngenerations,—Estella's children, and their children,—while the wretch's wordswere yet on his lips.
"Now, wolf," said he, "afore I kill you like any other beast,—which is wot Imean to do and wot I have tied you up for,—I'll have a good look at you and agood goad at you. O you enemy!"
It had passed through my thoughts to cry out for help again; though few couldknow better than I, the solitary nature of the spot, and the hopelessness ofaid. But as he sat gloating over me, I was supported by a scornful detestationof him that sealed my lips. Above all things, I resolved that I would notentreat him, and that I would die making some last poor resistance to him.Softened as my thoughts of all the rest of men were in that dire extremity;humbly beseeching pardon, as I did, of Heaven; melted at heart, as I was, bythe thought that I had taken no farewell, and never now could take farewell ofthose who were dear to me, or could explain myself to them, or ask for theircompassion on my miserable errors,—still, if I could have killed him, even indying, I would have done it.
He had been drinking, and his eyes were red and bloodshot. Around his neck wasslung a tin bottle, as I had often seen his meat and drink slung about him inother days. He brought the bottle to his lips, and took a fiery drink from it;and I smelt the strong spirits that I saw flash into his face.
"Wolf!" said he, folding his arms again, "Old Orlick's a-going to tell yousomethink. It was you as did for your shrew sister."
Again my mind, with its former inconceivable rapidity, had exhausted the wholesubject of the attack upon my sister, her illness, and her death, before hisslow and hesitating speech had formed these words.
"It was you, villain," said I.
"I tell you it was your doing,—I tell you it was done through you," heretorted, catching up the gun, and making a blow with the stock at the vacantair between us. "I come upon her from behind, as I come upon you to-night.I giv' it her! I left her for dead, and if there had been a limekiln asnigh her as there is now nigh you, she shouldn't have come to life again. Butit warn't Old Orlick as did it; it was you. You was favoured, and he wasbullied and beat. Old Orlick bullied and beat, eh? Now you pays for it. Youdone it; now you pays for it."
He drank again, and became more ferocious. I saw by his tilting of the bottlethat there was no great quantity left in it. I distinctly understood that hewas working himself up with its contents to make an end of me. I knew thatevery drop it held was a drop of my life. I knew that when I was changed into apart of the vapour that had crept towards me but a little while before, like myown warning ghost, he would do as he had done in my sister's case,—make allhaste to the town, and be seen slouching about there drinking at the alehouses.My rapid mind pursued him to the town, made a picture of the street with him init, and contrasted its lights and life with the lonely marsh and the whitevapour creeping over it, into which I should have dissolved.
It was not only that I could have summed up years and years and years while hesaid a dozen words, but that what he did say presented pictures to me, and notmere words. In the excited and exalted state of my brain, I could not think ofa place without seeing it, or of persons without seeing them. It is impossibleto overstate the vividness of these images, and yet I was so intent, all thetime, upon him himself,—who would not be intent on the tiger crouching tospring!—that I knew of the slightest action of his fingers.
When he had drunk this second time, he rose from the bench on which he sat, andpushed the table aside. Then, he took up the candle, and, shading it with hismurderous hand so as to throw its light on me, stood before me, looking at meand enjoying the sight.
"Wolf, I'll tell you something more. It was Old Orlick as you tumbled over onyour stairs that night."
I saw the staircase with its extinguished lamps. I saw the shadows of the heavystair-rails, thrown by the watchman's lantern on the wall. I saw the rooms thatI was never to see again; here, a door half open; there, a door closed; all thearticles of furniture around.
"And why was Old Orlick there? I'll tell you something more, wolf. You and herhave pretty well hunted me out of this country, so far as getting a easyliving in it goes, and I've took up with new companions, and new masters. Someof 'em writes my letters when I wants 'em wrote,—do you mind?—writes myletters, wolf! They writes fifty hands; they're not like sneaking you, aswrites but one. I've had a firm mind and a firm will to have your life, sinceyou was down here at your sister's burying. I han't seen a way to get you safe,and I've looked arter you to know your ins and outs. For, says Old Orlick tohimself, ‘Somehow or another I'll have him!' What! When I looks for you, Ifinds your uncle Provis, eh?"
Mill Pond Bank, and Chinks's Basin, and the Old Green Copper Rope-walk, all soclear and plain! Provis in his rooms, the signal whose use was over, prettyClara, the good motherly woman, old Bill Barley on his back, all drifting by,as on the swift stream of my life fast running out to sea!
"You with a uncle too! Why, I know'd you at Gargery's when you was sosmall a wolf that I could have took your weazen betwixt this finger and thumband chucked you away dead (as I'd thoughts o' doing, odd times, when I see youloitering amongst the pollards on a Sunday), and you hadn't found no unclesthen. No, not you! But when Old Orlick come for to hear that your uncle Provishad most like wore the leg-iron wot Old Orlick had picked up, filed asunder, onthese meshes ever so many year ago, and wot he kep by him till he dropped yoursister with it, like a bullock, as he means to drop you—hey?—when he come forto hear that—hey?"
In his savage taunting, he flared the candle so close at me that I turned myface aside to save it from the flame.
"Ah!" he cried, laughing, after doing it again, "the burnt child dreads thefire! Old Orlick knowed you was burnt, Old Orlick knowed you was smuggling youruncle Provis away, Old Orlick's a match for you and know'd you'd come to-night!Now I'll tell you something more, wolf, and this ends it. There's them that'sas good a match for your uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for you. Let him'ware them, when he's lost his nevvy! Let him 'ware them, when no man can'tfind a rag of his dear relation's clothes, nor yet a bone of his body. There'sthem that can't and that won't have Magwitch,—yes, I know thename!—alive in the same land with them, and that's had such sure information ofhim when he was alive in another land, as that he couldn't and shouldn't leaveit unbeknown and put them in danger. P'raps it's them that writes fifty hands,and that's not like sneaking you as writes but one. 'Ware Compeyson, Magwitch,and the gallows!"
He flared the candle at me again, smoking my face and hair, and for an instantblinding me, and turned his powerful back as he replaced the light on thetable. I had thought a prayer, and had been with Joe and Biddy and Herbert,before he turned towards me again.
There was a clear space of a few feet between the table and the opposite wall.Within this space, he now slouched backwards and forwards. His great strengthseemed to sit stronger upon him than ever before, as he did this with his handshanging loose and heavy at his sides, and with his eyes scowling at me. I hadno grain of hope left. Wild as my inward hurry was, and wonderful the force ofthe pictures that rushed by me instead of thoughts, I could yet clearlyunderstand that, unless he had resolved that I was within a few moments ofsurely perishing out of all human knowledge, he would never have told me whathe had told.
Of a sudden, he stopped, took the cork out of his bottle, and tossed it away.Light as it was, I heard it fall like a plummet. He swallowed slowly, tiltingup the bottle by little and little, and now he looked at me no more. The lastfew drops of liquor he poured into the palm of his hand, and licked up. Then,with a sudden hurry of violence and swearing horribly, he threw the bottle fromhim, and stooped; and I saw in his hand a stone-hammer with a long heavyhandle.
The resolution I had made did not desert me, for, without uttering one vainword of appeal to him, I shouted out with all my might, and struggled with allmy might. It was only my head and my legs that I could move, but to that extentI struggled with all the force, until then unknown, that was within me. In thesame instant I heard responsive shouts, saw figures and a gleam of light dashin at the door, heard voices and tumult, and saw Orlick emerge from a struggleof men, as if it were tumbling water, clear the table at a leap, and fly outinto the night.
After a blank, I found that I was lying unbound, on the floor, in the sameplace, with my head on some one's knee. My eyes were fixed on the ladderagainst the wall, when I came to myself,—had opened on it before my mind sawit,—and thus as I recovered consciousness, I knew that I was in the place whereI had lost it.
Too indifferent at first, even to look round and ascertain who supported me, Iwas lying looking at the ladder, when there came between me and it a face. Theface of Trabb's boy!
"I think he's all right!" said Trabb's boy, in a sober voice; "but ain't hejust pale though!"
At these words, the face of him who supported me looked over into mine, and Isaw my supporter to be—
"Herbert! Great Heaven!"
"Softly," said Herbert. "Gently, Handel. Don't be too eager."
"And our old comrade, Startop!" I cried, as he too bent over me.
"Remember what he is going to assist us in," said Herbert, "and be calm."
The allusion made me spring up; though I dropped again from the pain in my arm."The time has not gone by, Herbert, has it? What night is to-night? How longhave I been here?" For, I had a strange and strong misgiving that I had beenlying there a long time—a day and a night,—two days and nights,—more.
"The time has not gone by. It is still Monday night."
"Thank God!"
"And you have all to-morrow, Tuesday, to rest in," said Herbert. "But you can'thelp groaning, my dear Handel. What hurt have you got? Can you stand?"
"Yes, yes," said I, "I can walk. I have no hurt but in this throbbing arm."
They laid it bare, and did what they could. It was violently swollen andinflamed, and I could scarcely endure to have it touched. But, they tore uptheir handkerchiefs to make fresh bandages, and carefully replaced it in thesling, until we could get to the town and obtain some cooling lotion to putupon it. In a little while we had shut the door of the dark and emptysluice-house, and were passing through the quarry on our way back. Trabb'sboy—Trabb's overgrown young man now—went before us with a lantern, which wasthe light I had seen come in at the door. But, the moon was a good two hourshigher than when I had last seen the sky, and the night, though rainy, was muchlighter. The white vapour of the kiln was passing from us as we went by, and asI had thought a prayer before, I thought a thanksgiving now.
Entreating Herbert to tell me how he had come to my rescue,—which at first hehad flatly refused to do, but had insisted on my remaining quiet,—I learnt thatI had in my hurry dropped the letter, open, in our chambers, where he, cominghome to bring with him Startop whom he had met in the street on his way to me,found it, very soon after I was gone. Its tone made him uneasy, and the more sobecause of the inconsistency between it and the hasty letter I had left forhim. His uneasiness increasing instead of subsiding, after a quarter of anhour's consideration, he set off for the coach-office with Startop, whovolunteered his company, to make inquiry when the next coach went down. Findingthat the afternoon coach was gone, and finding that his uneasiness grew intopositive alarm, as obstacles came in his way, he resolved to follow in apost-chaise. So he and Startop arrived at the Blue Boar, fully expecting thereto find me, or tidings of me; but, finding neither, went on to Miss Havisham's,where they lost me. Hereupon they went back to the hotel (doubtless at aboutthe time when I was hearing the popular local version of my own story) torefresh themselves and to get some one to guide them out upon the marshes.Among the loungers under the Boar's archway happened to be Trabb's Boy,—true tohis ancient habit of happening to be everywhere where he had no business,—andTrabb's boy had seen me passing from Miss Havisham's in the direction of mydining-place. Thus Trabb's boy became their guide, and with him they went outto the sluice-house, though by the town way to the marshes, which I hadavoided. Now, as they went along, Herbert reflected, that I might, after all,have been brought there on some genuine and serviceable errand tending toProvis's safety, and, bethinking himself that in that case interruption must bemischievous, left his guide and Startop on the edge of the quarry, and went onby himself, and stole round the house two or three times, endeavouring toascertain whether all was right within. As he could hear nothing but indistinctsounds of one deep rough voice (this was while my mind was so busy), he even atlast began to doubt whether I was there, when suddenly I cried out loudly, andhe answered the cries, and rushed in, closely followed by the other two.
When I told Herbert what had passed within the house, he was for ourimmediately going before a magistrate in the town, late at night as it was, andgetting out a warrant. But, I had already considered that such a course, bydetaining us there, or binding us to come back, might be fatal to Provis. Therewas no gainsaying this difficulty, and we relinquished all thoughts of pursuingOrlick at that time. For the present, under the circumstances, we deemed itprudent to make rather light of the matter to Trabb's boy; who, I am convinced,would have been much affected by disappointment, if he had known that hisintervention saved me from the limekiln. Not that Trabb's boy was of amalignant nature, but that he had too much spare vivacity, and that it was inhis constitution to want variety and excitement at anybody's expense. When weparted, I presented him with two guineas (which seemed to meet his views), andtold him that I was sorry ever to have had an ill opinion of him (which made noimpression on him at all).
Wednesday being so close upon us, we determined to go back to London thatnight, three in the post-chaise; the rather, as we should then be clear awaybefore the night's adventure began to be talked of. Herbert got a large bottleof stuff for my arm; and by dint of having this stuff dropped over it all thenight through, I was just able to bear its pain on the journey. It was daylightwhen we reached the Temple, and I went at once to bed, and lay in bed all day.
My terror, as I lay there, of falling ill, and being unfitted for to-morrow,was so besetting, that I wonder it did not disable me of itself. It would havedone so, pretty surely, in conjunction with the mental wear and tear I hadsuffered, but for the unnatural strain upon me that to-morrow was. So anxiouslylooked forward to, charged with such consequences, its results so impenetrablyhidden, though so near.
No precaution could have been more obvious than our refraining fromcommunication with him that day; yet this again increased my restlessness. Istarted at every footstep and every sound, believing that he was discovered andtaken, and this was the messenger to tell me so. I persuaded myself that I knewhe was taken; that there was something more upon my mind than a fear or apresentiment; that the fact had occurred, and I had a mysterious knowledge ofit. As the days wore on, and no ill news came, as the day closed in anddarkness fell, my overshadowing dread of being disabled by illness beforeto-morrow morning altogether mastered me. My burning arm throbbed, and myburning head throbbed, and I fancied I was beginning to wander. I counted up tohigh numbers, to make sure of myself, and repeated passages that I knew inprose and verse. It happened sometimes that in the mere escape of a fatiguedmind, I dozed for some moments or forgot; then I would say to myself with astart, "Now it has come, and I am turning delirious!"
They kept me very quiet all day, and kept my arm constantly dressed, and gaveme cooling drinks. Whenever I fell asleep, I awoke with the notion I had had inthe sluice-house, that a long time had elapsed and the opportunity to save himwas gone. About midnight I got out of bed and went to Herbert, with theconviction that I had been asleep for four-and-twenty hours, and that Wednesdaywas past. It was the last self-exhausting effort of my fretfulness, for afterthat I slept soundly.
Wednesday morning was dawning when I looked out of window. The winking lightsupon the bridges were already pale, the coming sun was like a marsh of fire onthe horizon. The river, still dark and mysterious, was spanned by bridges thatwere turning coldly grey, with here and there at top a warm touch from theburning in the sky. As I looked along the clustered roofs, with church-towersand spires shooting into the unusually clear air, the sun rose up, and a veilseemed to be drawn from the river, and millions of sparkles burst out upon itswaters. From me too, a veil seemed to be drawn, and I felt strong and well.
Herbert lay asleep in his bed, and our old fellow-student lay asleep on thesofa. I could not dress myself without help; but I made up the fire, which wasstill burning, and got some coffee ready for them. In good time they toostarted up strong and well, and we admitted the sharp morning air at thewindows, and looked at the tide that was still flowing towards us.
"When it turns at nine o'clock," said Herbert, cheerfully, "look out for us,and stand ready, you over there at Mill Pond Bank!"
