
Chapter LV.
He wastaken to the Police Court next day, and would have been immediately committedfor trial, but that it was necessary to send down for an old officer of theprison-ship from which he had once escaped, to speak to his identity. Nobodydoubted it; but Compeyson, who had meant to depose to it, was tumbling on thetides, dead, and it happened that there was not at that time any prison officerin London who could give the required evidence. I had gone direct to Mr.Jaggers at his private house, on my arrival over night, to retain hisassistance, and Mr. Jaggers on the prisoner's behalf would admit nothing. Itwas the sole resource; for he told me that the case must be over in fiveminutes when the witness was there, and that no power on earth could preventits going against us.
I imparted to Mr. Jaggers my design of keeping him in ignorance of the fate ofhis wealth. Mr. Jaggers was querulous and angry with me for having "let it slipthrough my fingers," and said we must memorialise by and by, and try at allevents for some of it. But he did not conceal from me that, although theremight be many cases in which the forfeiture would not be exacted, there were nocircumstances in this case to make it one of them. I understood that very well.I was not related to the outlaw, or connected with him by any recognisable tie;he had put his hand to no writing or settlement in my favour before hisapprehension, and to do so now would be idle. I had no claim, and I finallyresolved, and ever afterwards abided by the resolution, that my heart shouldnever be sickened with the hopeless task of attempting to establish one.
There appeared to be reason for supposing that the drowned informer had hopedfor a reward out of this forfeiture, and had obtained some accurate knowledgeof Magwitch's affairs. When his body was found, many miles from the scene ofhis death, and so horribly disfigured that he was only recognisable by thecontents of his pockets, notes were still legible, folded in a case he carried.Among these were the name of a banking-house in New South Wales, where a sum ofmoney was, and the designation of certain lands of considerable value. Boththese heads of information were in a list that Magwitch, while in prison, gaveto Mr. Jaggers, of the possessions he supposed I should inherit. His ignorance,poor fellow, at last served him; he never mistrusted but that my inheritancewas quite safe, with Mr. Jaggers's aid.
After three days' delay, during which the crown prosecution stood over for theproduction of the witness from the prison-ship, the witness came, and completedthe easy case. He was committed to take his trial at the next Sessions, whichwould come on in a month.
It was at this dark time of my life that Herbert returned home one evening, agood deal cast down, and said,—
"My dear Handel, I fear I shall soon have to leave you."
His partner having prepared me for that, I was less surprised than he thought.
"We shall lose a fine opportunity if I put off going to Cairo, and I am verymuch afraid I must go, Handel, when you most need me."
"Herbert, I shall always need you, because I shall always love you; but my needis no greater now than at another time."
"You will be so lonely."
"I have not leisure to think of that," said I. "You know that I am always withhim to the full extent of the time allowed, and that I should be with him allday long, if I could. And when I come away from him, you know that my thoughtsare with him."
The dreadful condition to which he was brought, was so appalling to both of us,that we could not refer to it in plainer words.
"My dear fellow," said Herbert, "let the near prospect of our separation—for,it is very near—be my justification for troubling you about yourself. Have youthought of your future?"
"No, for I have been afraid to think of any future."
"But yours cannot be dismissed; indeed, my dear dear Handel, it must not bedismissed. I wish you would enter on it now, as far as a few friendly words go,with me."
"I will," said I.
"In this branch house of ours, Handel, we must have a—"
I saw that his delicacy was avoiding the right word, so I said, "A clerk."
"A clerk. And I hope it is not at all unlikely that he may expand (as a clerkof your acquaintance has expanded) into a partner. Now, Handel,—in short, mydear boy, will you come to me?"
There was something charmingly cordial and engaging in the manner in whichafter saying "Now, Handel," as if it were the grave beginning of a portentousbusiness exordium, he had suddenly given up that tone, stretched out his honesthand, and spoken like a schoolboy.
"Clara and I have talked about it again and again," Herbert pursued, "and thedear little thing begged me only this evening, with tears in her eyes, to sayto you that, if you will live with us when we come together, she will do herbest to make you happy, and to convince her husband's friend that he is herfriend too. We should get on so well, Handel!"
I thanked her heartily, and I thanked him heartily, but said I could not yetmake sure of joining him as he so kindly offered. Firstly, my mind was toopreoccupied to be able to take in the subject clearly. Secondly,—Yes! Secondly,there was a vague something lingering in my thoughts that will come out verynear the end of this slight narrative.
"But if you thought, Herbert, that you could, without doing any injury to yourbusiness, leave the question open for a little while—"
"For any while," cried Herbert. "Six months, a year!"
"Not so long as that," said I. "Two or three months at most."
Herbert was highly delighted when we shook hands on this arrangement, and saidhe could now take courage to tell me that he believed he must go away at theend of the week.
"And Clara?" said I.
"The dear little thing," returned Herbert, "holds dutifully to her father aslong as he lasts; but he won't last long. Mrs. Whimple confides to me that heis certainly going."
"Not to say an unfeeling thing," said I, "he cannot do better than go."
"I am afraid that must be admitted," said Herbert; "and then I shall come backfor the dear little thing, and the dear little thing and I will walk quietlyinto the nearest church. Remember! The blessed darling comes of no family, mydear Handel, and never looked into the red book, and hasn't a notion about hergrandpapa. What a fortune for the son of my mother!"
On the Saturday in that same week, I took my leave of Herbert,—full of brighthope, but sad and sorry to leave me,—as he sat on one of the seaport mailcoaches. I went into a coffee-house to write a little note to Clara, tellingher he had gone off, sending his love to her over and over again, and then wentto my lonely home,—if it deserved the name; for it was now no home to me, and Ihad no home anywhere.
On the stairs I encountered Wemmick, who was coming down, after an unsuccessfulapplication of his knuckles to my door. I had not seen him alone since thedisastrous issue of the attempted flight; and he had come, in his private andpersonal capacity, to say a few words of explanation in reference to thatfailure.
"The late Compeyson," said Wemmick, "had by little and little got at the bottomof half of the regular business now transacted; and it was from the talk ofsome of his people in trouble (some of his people being always in trouble) thatI heard what I did. I kept my ears open, seeming to have them shut, until Iheard that he was absent, and I thought that would be the best time for makingthe attempt. I can only suppose now, that it was a part of his policy, as avery clever man, habitually to deceive his own instruments. You don't blame me,I hope, Mr. Pip? I am sure I tried to serve you, with all my heart."
"I am as sure of that, Wemmick, as you can be, and I thank you most earnestlyfor all your interest and friendship."
"Thank you, thank you very much. It's a bad job," said Wemmick, scratching hishead, "and I assure you I haven't been so cut up for a long time. What I lookat is the sacrifice of so much portable property. Dear me!"
"What I think of, Wemmick, is the poor owner of the property."
"Yes, to be sure," said Wemmick. "Of course, there can be no objection to yourbeing sorry for him, and I'd put down a five-pound note myself to get him outof it. But what I look at is this. The late Compeyson having been beforehandwith him in intelligence of his return, and being so determined to bring him tobook, I do not think he could have been saved. Whereas, the portable propertycertainly could have been saved. That's the difference between the property andthe owner, don't you see?"
I invited Wemmick to come upstairs, and refresh himself with a glass of grogbefore walking to Walworth. He accepted the invitation. While he was drinkinghis moderate allowance, he said, with nothing to lead up to it, and afterhaving appeared rather fidgety,—
"What do you think of my meaning to take a holiday on Monday, Mr. Pip?"
"Why, I suppose you have not done such a thing these twelve months."
"These twelve years, more likely," said Wemmick. "Yes. I'm going to take aholiday. More than that; I'm going to take a walk. More than that; I'm going toask you to take a walk with me."
I was about to excuse myself, as being but a bad companion just then, whenWemmick anticipated me.
"I know your engagements," said he, "and I know you are out of sorts, Mr. Pip.But if you could oblige me, I should take it as a kindness. It ain't along walk, and it's an early one. Say it might occupy you (including breakfaston the walk) from eight to twelve. Couldn't you stretch a point and manage it?"
He had done so much for me at various times, that this was very little to dofor him. I said I could manage it,—would manage it,—and he was so very muchpleased by my acquiescence, that I was pleased too. At his particular request,I appointed to call for him at the Castle at half past eight on Monday morning,and so we parted for the time.
Punctual to my appointment, I rang at the Castle gate on the Monday morning,and was received by Wemmick himself, who struck me as looking tighter thanusual, and having a sleeker hat on. Within, there were two glasses of rum andmilk prepared, and two biscuits. The Aged must have been stirring with thelark, for, glancing into the perspective of his bedroom, I observed that hisbed was empty.
When we had fortified ourselves with the rum and milk and biscuits, and weregoing out for the walk with that training preparation on us, I was considerablysurprised to see Wemmick take up a fishing-rod, and put it over his shoulder."Why, we are not going fishing!" said I. "No," returned Wemmick, "but I like towalk with one."
I thought this odd; however, I said nothing, and we set off. We went towardsCamberwell Green, and when we were thereabouts, Wemmick said suddenly,—
"Halloa! Here's a church!"
There was nothing very surprising in that; but again, I was rather surprised,when he said, as if he were animated by a brilliant idea,—
"Let's go in!"
We went in, Wemmick leaving his fishing-rod in the porch, and looked all round.In the mean time, Wemmick was diving into his coat-pockets, and gettingsomething out of paper there.
"Halloa!" said he. "Here's a couple of pair of gloves! Let's put 'em on!"
As the gloves were white kid gloves, and as the post-office was widened to itsutmost extent, I now began to have my strong suspicions. They were strengthenedinto certainty when I beheld the Aged enter at a side door, escorting a lady.
"Halloa!" said Wemmick. "Here's Miss Skiffins! Let's have a wedding."
That discreet damsel was attired as usual, except that she was now engaged insubstituting for her green kid gloves a pair of white. The Aged was likewiseoccupied in preparing a similar sacrifice for the altar of Hymen. The oldgentleman, however, experienced so much difficulty in getting his gloves on,that Wemmick found it necessary to put him with his back against a pillar, andthen to get behind the pillar himself and pull away at them, while I for mypart held the old gentleman round the waist, that he might present an equal andsafe resistance. By dint of this ingenious scheme, his gloves were got on toperfection.
The clerk and clergyman then appearing, we were ranged in order at those fatalrails. True to his notion of seeming to do it all without preparation, I heardWemmick say to himself, as he took something out of his waistcoat-pocket beforethe service began, "Halloa! Here's a ring!"
I acted in the capacity of backer, or best-man, to the bridegroom; while alittle limp pew-opener in a soft bonnet like a baby's, made a feint of beingthe bosom friend of Miss Skiffins. The responsibility of giving the lady awaydevolved upon the Aged, which led to the clergyman's being unintentionallyscandalised, and it happened thus. When he said, "Who giveth this woman to bemarried to this man?" the old gentleman, not in the least knowing what point ofthe ceremony we had arrived at, stood most amiably beaming at the tencommandments. Upon which, the clergyman said again, "WHO giveththis woman to be married to this man?" The old gentleman being still in a stateof most estimable unconsciousness, the bridegroom cried out in his accustomedvoice, "Now Aged P. you know; who giveth?" To which the Aged replied with greatbriskness, before saying that he gave, "All right, John, all right, myboy!" And the clergyman came to so gloomy a pause upon it, that I had doubtsfor the moment whether we should get completely married that day.
It was completely done, however, and when we were going out of church Wemmicktook the cover off the font, and put his white gloves in it, and put the coveron again. Mrs. Wemmick, more heedful of the future, put her white gloves in herpocket and assumed her green. "Now, Mr. Pip," said Wemmick, triumphantlyshouldering the fishing-rod as we came out, "let me ask you whether anybodywould suppose this to be a wedding-party!"
Breakfast had been ordered at a pleasant little tavern, a mile or so away uponthe rising ground beyond the green; and there was a bagatelle board in theroom, in case we should desire to unbend our minds after the solemnity. It waspleasant to observe that Mrs. Wemmick no longer unwound Wemmick's arm when itadapted itself to her figure, but sat in a high-backed chair against the wall,like a violoncello in its case, and submitted to be embraced as that melodiousinstrument might have done.
We had an excellent breakfast, and when any one declined anything on table,Wemmick said, "Provided by contract, you know; don't be afraid of it!" I drankto the new couple, drank to the Aged, drank to the Castle, saluted the bride atparting, and made myself as agreeable as I could.
Wemmick came down to the door with me, and I again shook hands with him, andwished him joy.
"Thankee!" said Wemmick, rubbing his hands. "She's such a manager of fowls, youhave no idea. You shall have some eggs, and judge for yourself. I say, Mr.Pip!" calling me back, and speaking low. "This is altogether a Walworthsentiment, please."
"I understand. Not to be mentioned in Little Britain," said I.
Wemmick nodded. "After what you let out the other day, Mr. Jaggers may as wellnot know of it. He might think my brain was softening, or something of thekind."
