
Chapter LVI.
He layin prison very ill, during the whole interval between his committal for trialand the coming round of the Sessions. He had broken two ribs, they had woundedone of his lungs, and he breathed with great pain and difficulty, whichincreased daily. It was a consequence of his hurt that he spoke so low as to bescarcely audible; therefore he spoke very little. But he was ever ready tolisten to me; and it became the first duty of my life to say to him, and readto him, what I knew he ought to hear.
Being far too ill to remain in the common prison, he was removed, after thefirst day or so, into the infirmary. This gave me opportunities of being withhim that I could not otherwise have had. And but for his illness he would havebeen put in irons, for he was regarded as a determined prison-breaker, and Iknow not what else.
Although I saw him every day, it was for only a short time; hence, theregularly recurring spaces of our separation were long enough to record on hisface any slight changes that occurred in his physical state. I do not recollectthat I once saw any change in it for the better; he wasted, and became slowlyweaker and worse, day by day, from the day when the prison door closed uponhim.
The kind of submission or resignation that he showed was that of a man who wastired out. I sometimes derived an impression, from his manner or from awhispered word or two which escaped him, that he pondered over the questionwhether he might have been a better man under better circumstances. But henever justified himself by a hint tending that way, or tried to bend the pastout of its eternal shape.
It happened on two or three occasions in my presence, that his desperatereputation was alluded to by one or other of the people in attendance on him. Asmile crossed his face then, and he turned his eyes on me with a trustful look,as if he were confident that I had seen some small redeeming touch in him, evenso long ago as when I was a little child. As to all the rest, he was humble andcontrite, and I never knew him complain.
When the Sessions came round, Mr. Jaggers caused an application to be made forthe postponement of his trial until the following Sessions. It was obviouslymade with the assurance that he could not live so long, and was refused. Thetrial came on at once, and, when he was put to the bar, he was seated in achair. No objection was made to my getting close to the dock, on the outside ofit, and holding the hand that he stretched forth to me.
The trial was very short and very clear. Such things as could be said for himwere said,—how he had taken to industrious habits, and had thriven lawfully andreputably. But nothing could unsay the fact that he had returned, and was therein presence of the Judge and Jury. It was impossible to try him for that, anddo otherwise than find him guilty.
At that time, it was the custom (as I learnt from my terrible experience ofthat Sessions) to devote a concluding day to the passing of Sentences, and tomake a finishing effect with the Sentence of Death. But for the indeliblepicture that my remembrance now holds before me, I could scarcely believe, evenas I write these words, that I saw two-and-thirty men and women put before theJudge to receive that sentence together. Foremost among the two-and-thirty washe; seated, that he might get breath enough to keep life in him.
The whole scene starts out again in the vivid colours of the moment, down tothe drops of April rain on the windows of the court, glittering in the rays ofApril sun. Penned in the dock, as I again stood outside it at the corner withhis hand in mine, were the two-and-thirty men and women; some defiant, somestricken with terror, some sobbing and weeping, some covering their faces, somestaring gloomily about. There had been shrieks from among the women convicts;but they had been stilled, and a hush had succeeded. The sheriffs with theirgreat chains and nosegays, other civic gewgaws and monsters, criers, ushers, agreat gallery full of people,—a large theatrical audience,—looked on, as thetwo-and-thirty and the Judge were solemnly confronted. Then the Judge addressedthem. Among the wretched creatures before him whom he must single out forspecial address was one who almost from his infancy had been an offenderagainst the laws; who, after repeated imprisonments and punishments, had beenat length sentenced to exile for a term of years; and who, under circumstancesof great violence and daring, had made his escape and been re-sentenced toexile for life. That miserable man would seem for a time to have becomeconvinced of his errors, when far removed from the scenes of his old offences,and to have lived a peaceable and honest life. But in a fatal moment, yieldingto those propensities and passions, the indulgence of which had so longrendered him a scourge to society, he had quitted his haven of rest andrepentance, and had come back to the country where he was proscribed. Beinghere presently denounced, he had for a time succeeded in evading the officersof Justice, but being at length seized while in the act of flight, he hadresisted them, and had—he best knew whether by express design, or in theblindness of his hardihood—caused the death of his denouncer, to whom his wholecareer was known. The appointed punishment for his return to the land that hadcast him out, being Death, and his case being this aggravated case, he mustprepare himself to Die.
The sun was striking in at the great windows of the court, through theglittering drops of rain upon the glass, and it made a broad shaft of lightbetween the two-and-thirty and the Judge, linking both together, and perhapsreminding some among the audience how both were passing on, with absoluteequality, to the greater Judgment that knoweth all things, and cannot err.Rising for a moment, a distinct speck of face in this way of light, theprisoner said, "My Lord, I have received my sentence of Death from theAlmighty, but I bow to yours," and sat down again. There was some hushing, andthe Judge went on with what he had to say to the rest. Then they were allformally doomed, and some of them were supported out, and some of themsauntered out with a haggard look of bravery, and a few nodded to the gallery,and two or three shook hands, and others went out chewing the fragments of herbthey had taken from the sweet herbs lying about. He went last of all, becauseof having to be helped from his chair, and to go very slowly; and he held myhand while all the others were removed, and while the audience got up (puttingtheir dresses right, as they might at church or elsewhere), and pointed down atthis criminal or at that, and most of all at him and me.
I earnestly hoped and prayed that he might die before the Recorder's Report wasmade; but, in the dread of his lingering on, I began that night to write out apetition to the Home Secretary of State, setting forth my knowledge of him, andhow it was that he had come back for my sake. I wrote it as fervently andpathetically as I could; and when I had finished it and sent it in, I wrote outother petitions to such men in authority as I hoped were the most merciful, anddrew up one to the Crown itself. For several days and nights after he wassentenced I took no rest except when I fell asleep in my chair, but was whollyabsorbed in these appeals. And after I had sent them in, I could not keep awayfrom the places where they were, but felt as if they were more hopeful and lessdesperate when I was near them. In this unreasonable restlessness and pain ofmind I would roam the streets of an evening, wandering by those offices andhouses where I had left the petitions. To the present hour, the weary westernstreets of London on a cold, dusty spring night, with their ranges of stern,shut-up mansions, and their long rows of lamps, are melancholy to me from thisassociation.
The daily visits I could make him were shortened now, and he was more strictlykept. Seeing, or fancying, that I was suspected of an intention of carryingpoison to him, I asked to be searched before I sat down at his bedside, andtold the officer who was always there, that I was willing to do anything thatwould assure him of the singleness of my designs. Nobody was hard with him orwith me. There was duty to be done, and it was done, but not harshly. Theofficer always gave me the assurance that he was worse, and some other sickprisoners in the room, and some other prisoners who attended on them as sicknurses, (malefactors, but not incapable of kindness, God be thanked!) alwaysjoined in the same report.
As the days went on, I noticed more and more that he would lie placidly lookingat the white ceiling, with an absence of light in his face until some word ofmine brightened it for an instant, and then it would subside again. Sometimeshe was almost or quite unable to speak, then he would answer me with slightpressures on my hand, and I grew to understand his meaning very well.
The number of the days had risen to ten, when I saw a greater change in himthan I had seen yet. His eyes were turned towards the door, and lighted up as Ientered.
"Dear boy," he said, as I sat down by his bed: "I thought you was late. But Iknowed you couldn't be that."
"It is just the time," said I. "I waited for it at the gate."
"You always waits at the gate; don't you, dear boy?"
"Yes. Not to lose a moment of the time."
"Thank'ee dear boy, thank'ee. God bless you! You've never deserted me, dearboy."
I pressed his hand in silence, for I could not forget that I had once meant todesert him.
"And what's the best of all," he said, "you've been more comfortable alongerme, since I was under a dark cloud, than when the sun shone. That's best ofall."
He lay on his back, breathing with great difficulty. Do what he would, and loveme though he did, the light left his face ever and again, and a film came overthe placid look at the white ceiling.
"Are you in much pain to-day?"
"I don't complain of none, dear boy."
"You never do complain."
He had spoken his last words. He smiled, and I understood his touch to meanthat he wished to lift my hand, and lay it on his breast. I laid it there, andhe smiled again, and put both his hands upon it.
The allotted time ran out, while we were thus; but, looking round, I found thegovernor of the prison standing near me, and he whispered, "You needn't goyet." I thanked him gratefully, and asked, "Might I speak to him, if he canhear me?"
The governor stepped aside, and beckoned the officer away. The change, thoughit was made without noise, drew back the film from the placid look at the whiteceiling, and he looked most affectionately at me.
"Dear Magwitch, I must tell you now, at last. You understand what I say?"
A gentle pressure on my hand.
"You had a child once, whom you loved and lost."
A stronger pressure on my hand.
"She lived, and found powerful friends. She is living now. She is a lady andvery beautiful. And I love her!"
With a last faint effort, which would have been powerless but for my yieldingto it and assisting it, he raised my hand to his lips. Then, he gently let itsink upon his breast again, with his own hands lying on it. The placid look atthe white ceiling came back, and passed away, and his head dropped quietly onhis breast.
Mindful, then, of what we had read together, I thought of the two men who wentup into the Temple to pray, and I knew there were no better words that I couldsay beside his bed, than "O Lord, be merciful to him a sinner!"
