
Chapter LVII.
Nowthat I was left wholly to myself, I gave notice of my intention to quit thechambers in the Temple as soon as my tenancy could legally determine, and inthe meanwhile to underlet them. At once I put bills up in the windows; for, Iwas in debt, and had scarcely any money, and began to be seriously alarmed bythe state of my affairs. I ought rather to write that I should have beenalarmed if I had had energy and concentration enough to help me to the clearperception of any truth beyond the fact that I was falling very ill. The latestress upon me had enabled me to put off illness, but not to put it away; Iknew that it was coming on me now, and I knew very little else, and was evencareless as to that.
For a day or two, I lay on the sofa, or on the floor,—anywhere, according as Ihappened to sink down,—with a heavy head and aching limbs, and no purpose, andno power. Then there came, one night which appeared of great duration, andwhich teemed with anxiety and horror; and when in the morning I tried to sit upin my bed and think of it, I found I could not do so.
Whether I really had been down in Garden Court in the dead of the night,groping about for the boat that I supposed to be there; whether I had two orthree times come to myself on the staircase with great terror, not knowing howI had got out of bed; whether I had found myself lighting the lamp, possessedby the idea that he was coming up the stairs, and that the lights were blownout; whether I had been inexpressibly harassed by the distracted talking,laughing, and groaning of some one, and had half suspected those sounds to beof my own making; whether there had been a closed iron furnace in a dark cornerof the room, and a voice had called out, over and over again, that MissHavisham was consuming within it,—these were things that I tried to settle withmyself and get into some order, as I lay that morning on my bed. But the vapourof a limekiln would come between me and them, disordering them all, and it wasthrough the vapour at last that I saw two men looking at me.
"What do you want?" I asked, starting; "I don't know you."
"Well, sir," returned one of them, bending down and touching me on theshoulder, "this is a matter that you'll soon arrange, I dare say, but you'rearrested."
"What is the debt?"
"Hundred and twenty-three pound, fifteen, six. Jeweller's account, I think."
"What is to be done?"
"You had better come to my house," said the man. "I keep a very nice house."
I made some attempt to get up and dress myself. When I next attended to them,they were standing a little off from the bed, looking at me. I still lay there.
"You see my state," said I. "I would come with you if I could; but indeed I amquite unable. If you take me from here, I think I shall die by the way."
Perhaps they replied, or argued the point, or tried to encourage me to believethat I was better than I thought. Forasmuch as they hang in my memory by onlythis one slender thread, I don't know what they did, except that they forboreto remove me.
That I had a fever and was avoided, that I suffered greatly, that I often lostmy reason, that the time seemed interminable, that I confounded impossibleexistences with my own identity; that I was a brick in the house-wall, and yetentreating to be released from the giddy place where the builders had set me;that I was a steel beam of a vast engine, clashing and whirling over a gulf,and yet that I implored in my own person to have the engine stopped, and mypart in it hammered off; that I passed through these phases of disease, I knowof my own remembrance, and did in some sort know at the time. That I sometimesstruggled with real people, in the belief that they were murderers, and that Iwould all at once comprehend that they meant to do me good, and would then sinkexhausted in their arms, and suffer them to lay me down, I also knew at thetime. But, above all, I knew that there was a constant tendency in all thesepeople,—who, when I was very ill, would present all kinds of extraordinarytransformations of the human face, and would be much dilated in size,—aboveall, I say, I knew that there was an extraordinary tendency in all thesepeople, sooner or later, to settle down into the likeness of Joe.
After I had turned the worst point of my illness, I began to notice that whileall its other features changed, this one consistent feature did not change.Whoever came about me, still settled down into Joe. I opened my eyes in thenight, and I saw, in the great chair at the bedside, Joe. I opened my eyes inthe day, and, sitting on the window-seat, smoking his pipe in the shaded openwindow, still I saw Joe. I asked for cooling drink, and the dear hand that gaveit me was Joe's. I sank back on my pillow after drinking, and the face thatlooked so hopefully and tenderly upon me was the face of Joe.
At last, one day, I took courage, and said, "Is it Joe?"
And the dear old home-voice answered, "Which it air, old chap."
"O Joe, you break my heart! Look angry at me, Joe. Strike me, Joe. Tell me ofmy ingratitude. Don't be so good to me!"
For Joe had actually laid his head down on the pillow at my side, and put hisarm round my neck, in his joy that I knew him.
"Which dear old Pip, old chap," said Joe, "you and me was ever friends. Andwhen you're well enough to go out for a ride—what larks!"
After which, Joe withdrew to the window, and stood with his back towards me,wiping his eyes. And as my extreme weakness prevented me from getting up andgoing to him, I lay there, penitently whispering, "O God bless him! O God blessthis gentle Christian man!"
Joe's eyes were red when I next found him beside me; but I was holding hishand, and we both felt happy.
"How long, dear Joe?"
"Which you meantersay, Pip, how long have your illness lasted, dear old chap?"
"Yes, Joe."
"It's the end of May, Pip. To-morrow is the first of June."
"And have you been here all that time, dear Joe?"
"Pretty nigh, old chap. For, as I says to Biddy when the news of your being illwere brought by letter, which it were brought by the post, and being formerlysingle he is now married though underpaid for a deal of walking andshoe-leather, but wealth were not a object on his part, and marriage were thegreat wish of his hart—"
"It is so delightful to hear you, Joe! But I interrupt you in what you said toBiddy."
"Which it were," said Joe, "that how you might be amongst strangers, and thathow you and me having been ever friends, a wisit at such a moment might notprove unacceptabobble. And Biddy, her word were, ‘Go to him, without loss oftime.' That," said Joe, summing up with his judicial air, "were the word ofBiddy. ‘Go to him,' Biddy say, ‘without loss of time.' In short, I shouldn'tgreatly deceive you," Joe added, after a little grave reflection, "if Irepresented to you that the word of that young woman were, ‘without a minute'sloss of time.'"
There Joe cut himself short, and informed me that I was to be talked to ingreat moderation, and that I was to take a little nourishment at statedfrequent times, whether I felt inclined for it or not, and that I was to submitmyself to all his orders. So I kissed his hand, and lay quiet, while heproceeded to indite a note to Biddy, with my love in it.
Evidently Biddy had taught Joe to write. As I lay in bed looking at him, itmade me, in my weak state, cry again with pleasure to see the pride with whichhe set about his letter. My bedstead, divested of its curtains, had beenremoved, with me upon it, into the sitting-room, as the airiest and largest,and the carpet had been taken away, and the room kept always fresh andwholesome night and day. At my own writing-table, pushed into a corner andcumbered with little bottles, Joe now sat down to his great work, firstchoosing a pen from the pen-tray as if it were a chest of large tools, andtucking up his sleeves as if he were going to wield a crow-bar or sledgehammer.It was necessary for Joe to hold on heavily to the table with his left elbow,and to get his right leg well out behind him, before he could begin; and whenhe did begin he made every downstroke so slowly that it might have been sixfeet long, while at every upstroke I could hear his pen splutteringextensively. He had a curious idea that the inkstand was on the side of himwhere it was not, and constantly dipped his pen into space, and seemed quitesatisfied with the result. Occasionally, he was tripped up by someorthographical stumbling-block; but on the whole he got on very well indeed;and when he had signed his name, and had removed a finishing blot from thepaper to the crown of his head with his two forefingers, he got up and hoveredabout the table, trying the effect of his performance from various points ofview, as it lay there, with unbounded satisfaction.
Not to make Joe uneasy by talking too much, even if I had been able to talkmuch, I deferred asking him about Miss Havisham until next day. He shook hishead when I then asked him if she had recovered.
"Is she dead, Joe?"
"Why you see, old chap," said Joe, in a tone of remonstrance, and by way ofgetting at it by degrees, "I wouldn't go so far as to say that, for that's adeal to say; but she ain't—"
"Living, Joe?"
"That's nigher where it is," said Joe; "she ain't living."
"Did she linger long, Joe?"
"Arter you was took ill, pretty much about what you might call (if you was putto it) a week," said Joe; still determined, on my account, to come ateverything by degrees.
"Dear Joe, have you heard what becomes of her property?"
"Well, old chap," said Joe, "it do appear that she had settled the most of it,which I meantersay tied it up, on Miss Estella. But she had wrote out a littlecoddleshell in her own hand a day or two afore the accident, leaving a coolfour thousand to Mr. Matthew Pocket. And why, do you suppose, above all things,Pip, she left that cool four thousand unto him? ‘Because of Pip's account ofhim, the said Matthew.' I am told by Biddy, that air the writing," said Joe,repeating the legal turn as if it did him infinite good, "‘account of him thesaid Matthew.' And a cool four thousand, Pip!"
I never discovered from whom Joe derived the conventional temperature of thefour thousand pounds; but it appeared to make the sum of money more to him, andhe had a manifest relish in insisting on its being cool.
This account gave me great joy, as it perfected the only good thing I had done.I asked Joe whether he had heard if any of the other relations had anylegacies?
"Miss Sarah," said Joe, "she have twenty-five pound perannium fur to buy pills,on account of being bilious. Miss Georgiana, she have twenty pound down.Mrs.—what's the name of them wild beasts with humps, old chap?"
"Camels?" said I, wondering why he could possibly want to know.
Joe nodded. "Mrs. Camels," by which I presently understood he meant Camilla,"she have five pound fur to buy rushlights to put her in spirits when she wakeup in the night."
The accuracy of these recitals was sufficiently obvious to me, to give me greatconfidence in Joe's information. "And now," said Joe, "you ain't that strongyet, old chap, that you can take in more nor one additional shovelful to-day.Old Orlick he's been a bustin' open a dwelling-ouse."
"Whose?" said I.
"Not, I grant you, but what his manners is given to blusterous," said Joe,apologetically; "still, a Englishman's ouse is his Castle, and castles must notbe busted 'cept when done in war time. And wotsume'er the failings on his part,he were a corn and seedsman in his hart."
"Is it Pumblechook's house that has been broken into, then?"
"That's it, Pip," said Joe; "and they took his till, and they took hiscash-box, and they drinked his wine, and they partook of his wittles, and theyslapped his face, and they pulled his nose, and they tied him up to hisbedpust, and they giv' him a dozen, and they stuffed his mouth full offlowering annuals to prewent his crying out. But he knowed Orlick, and Orlick'sin the county jail."
By these approaches we arrived at unrestricted conversation. I was slow to gainstrength, but I did slowly and surely become less weak, and Joe stayed with me,and I fancied I was little Pip again.
For the tenderness of Joe was so beautifully proportioned to my need, that Iwas like a child in his hands. He would sit and talk to me in the oldconfidence, and with the old simplicity, and in the old unassertive protectingway, so that I would half believe that all my life since the days of the oldkitchen was one of the mental troubles of the fever that was gone. He dideverything for me except the household work, for which he had engaged a verydecent woman, after paying off the laundress on his first arrival. "Which I doassure you, Pip," he would often say, in explanation of that liberty; "I foundher a tapping the spare bed, like a cask of beer, and drawing off the feathersin a bucket, for sale. Which she would have tapped yourn next, and draw'd itoff with you a laying on it, and was then a carrying away the coals gradiwallyin the soup-tureen and wegetable-dishes, and the wine and spirits in yourWellington boots."
We looked forward to the day when I should go out for a ride, as we had oncelooked forward to the day of my apprenticeship. And when the day came, and anopen carriage was got into the Lane, Joe wrapped me up, took me in his arms,carried me down to it, and put me in, as if I were still the small helplesscreature to whom he had so abundantly given of the wealth of his great nature.
And Joe got in beside me, and we drove away together into the country, wherethe rich summer growth was already on the trees and on the grass, and sweetsummer scents filled all the air. The day happened to be Sunday, and when Ilooked on the loveliness around me, and thought how it had grown and changed,and how the little wild-flowers had been forming, and the voices of the birdshad been strengthening, by day and by night, under the sun and under the stars,while poor I lay burning and tossing on my bed, the mere remembrance of havingburned and tossed there came like a check upon my peace. But when I heard theSunday bells, and looked around a little more upon the outspread beauty, I feltthat I was not nearly thankful enough,—that I was too weak yet to be eventhat,—and I laid my head on Joe's shoulder, as I had laid it long ago when hehad taken me to the Fair or where not, and it was too much for my young senses.
More composure came to me after a while, and we talked as we used to talk,lying on the grass at the old Battery. There was no change whatever in Joe.Exactly what he had been in my eyes then, he was in my eyes still; just assimply faithful, and as simply right.
When we got back again, and he lifted me out, and carried me—so easily!—acrossthe court and up the stairs, I thought of that eventful Christmas Day when hehad carried me over the marshes. We had not yet made any allusion to my changeof fortune, nor did I know how much of my late history he was acquainted with.I was so doubtful of myself now, and put so much trust in him, that I could notsatisfy myself whether I ought to refer to it when he did not.
"Have you heard, Joe," I asked him that evening, upon further consideration, ashe smoked his pipe at the window, "who my patron was?"
"I heerd," returned Joe, "as it were not Miss Havisham, old chap."
"Did you hear who it was, Joe?"
"Well! I heerd as it were a person what sent the person what giv' you thebank-notes at the Jolly Bargemen, Pip."
"So it was."
"Astonishing!" said Joe, in the placidest way.
"Did you hear that he was dead, Joe?" I presently asked, with increasingdiffidence.
"Which? Him as sent the bank-notes, Pip?"
"Yes."
"I think," said Joe, after meditating a long time, and looking rather evasivelyat the window-seat, "as I did hear tell that how he were something oranother in a general way in that direction."
"Did you hear anything of his circumstances, Joe?"
"Not partickler, Pip."
"If you would like to hear, Joe—" I was beginning, when Joe got up and came tomy sofa.
"Lookee here, old chap," said Joe, bending over me. "Ever the best of friends;ain't us, Pip?"
I was ashamed to answer him.
"Wery good, then," said Joe, as if I had answered; "that's all right;that's agreed upon. Then why go into subjects, old chap, which as betwixt twosech must be for ever onnecessary? There's subjects enough as betwixt two sech,without onnecessary ones. Lord! To think of your poor sister and her Rampages!And don't you remember Tickler?"
"I do indeed, Joe."
"Lookee here, old chap," said Joe. "I done what I could to keep you and Ticklerin sunders, but my power were not always fully equal to my inclinations. Forwhen your poor sister had a mind to drop into you, it were not so much," saidJoe, in his favourite argumentative way, "that she dropped into me too, if Iput myself in opposition to her, but that she dropped into you always heavierfor it. I noticed that. It ain't a grab at a man's whisker, not yet a shake ortwo of a man (to which your sister was quite welcome), that 'ud put a man offfrom getting a little child out of punishment. But when that little child isdropped into heavier for that grab of whisker or shaking, then that mannaterally up and says to himself, ‘Where is the good as you are a-doing? Igrant you I see the 'arm,' says the man, ‘but I don't see the good. I call uponyou, sir, therefore, to pint out the good.'"
"The man says?" I observed, as Joe waited for me to speak.
"The man says," Joe assented. "Is he right, that man?"
"Dear Joe, he is always right."
"Well, old chap," said Joe, "then abide by your words. If he's always right(which in general he's more likely wrong), he's right when he says this:Supposing ever you kep any little matter to yourself, when you was a littlechild, you kep it mostly because you know'd as J. Gargery's power to part youand Tickler in sunders were not fully equal to his inclinations. Theerfore,think no more of it as betwixt two sech, and do not let us pass remarks upononnecessary subjects. Biddy giv' herself a deal o' trouble with me afore I left(for I am almost awful dull), as I should view it in this light, and, viewingit in this light, as I should so put it. Both of which," said Joe, quitecharmed with his logical arrangement, "being done, now this to you a truefriend, say. Namely. You mustn't go a overdoing on it, but you must have yoursupper and your wine and water, and you must be put betwixt the sheets."
The delicacy with which Joe dismissed this theme, and the sweet tact andkindness with which Biddy—who with her woman's wit had found me out so soon—hadprepared him for it, made a deep impression on my mind. But whether Joe knewhow poor I was, and how my great expectations had all dissolved, like our ownmarsh mists before the sun, I could not understand.
Another thing in Joe that I could not understand when it first began to developitself, but which I soon arrived at a sorrowful comprehension of, was this: AsI became stronger and better, Joe became a little less easy with me. In myweakness and entire dependence on him, the dear fellow had fallen into the oldtone, and called me by the old names, the dear "old Pip, old chap," that nowwere music in my ears. I too had fallen into the old ways, only happy andthankful that he let me. But, imperceptibly, though I held by them fast, Joe'shold upon them began to slacken; and whereas I wondered at this, at first, Isoon began to understand that the cause of it was in me, and that the fault ofit was all mine.
Ah! Had I given Joe no reason to doubt my constancy, and to think that inprosperity I should grow cold to him and cast him off? Had I given Joe'sinnocent heart no cause to feel instinctively that as I got stronger, his holdupon me would be weaker, and that he had better loosen it in time and let mego, before I plucked myself away?
It was on the third or fourth occasion of my going out walking in the TempleGardens leaning on Joe's arm, that I saw this change in him very plainly. Wehad been sitting in the bright warm sunlight, looking at the river, and Ichanced to say as we got up,—
"See, Joe! I can walk quite strongly. Now, you shall see me walk back bymyself."
"Which do not overdo it, Pip," said Joe; "but I shall be happy fur to see youable, sir."
The last word grated on me; but how could I remonstrate! I walked no furtherthan the gate of the gardens, and then pretended to be weaker than I was, andasked Joe for his arm. Joe gave it me, but was thoughtful.
I, for my part, was thoughtful too; for, how best to check this growing changein Joe was a great perplexity to my remorseful thoughts. That I was ashamed totell him exactly how I was placed, and what I had come down to, I do not seekto conceal; but I hope my reluctance was not quite an unworthy one. He wouldwant to help me out of his little savings, I knew, and I knew that he ought notto help me, and that I must not suffer him to do it.
It was a thoughtful evening with both of us. But, before we went to bed, I hadresolved that I would wait over to-morrow,—to-morrow being Sunday,—and wouldbegin my new course with the new week. On Monday morning I would speak to Joeabout this change, I would lay aside this last vestige of reserve, I would tellhim what I had in my thoughts (that Secondly, not yet arrived at), and why Ihad not decided to go out to Herbert, and then the change would be conqueredfor ever. As I cleared, Joe cleared, and it seemed as though he hadsympathetically arrived at a resolution too.
We had a quiet day on the Sunday, and we rode out into the country, and thenwalked in the fields.
"I feel thankful that I have been ill, Joe," I said.
"Dear old Pip, old chap, you're a'most come round, sir."
"It has been a memorable time for me, Joe."
"Likeways for myself, sir," Joe returned.
"We have had a time together, Joe, that I can never forget. There were daysonce, I know, that I did for a while forget; but I never shall forget these."
"Pip," said Joe, appearing a little hurried and troubled, "there has beenlarks. And, dear sir, what have been betwixt us—have been."
At night, when I had gone to bed, Joe came into my room, as he had done allthrough my recovery. He asked me if I felt sure that I was as well as in themorning?
"Yes, dear Joe, quite."
"And are always a getting stronger, old chap?"
"Yes, dear Joe, steadily."
Joe patted the coverlet on my shoulder with his great good hand, and said, inwhat I thought a husky voice, "Good night!"
When I got up in the morning, refreshed and stronger yet, I was full of myresolution to tell Joe all, without delay. I would tell him before breakfast. Iwould dress at once and go to his room and surprise him; for, it was the firstday I had been up early. I went to his room, and he was not there. Not only washe not there, but his box was gone.
I hurried then to the breakfast-table, and on it found a letter. These were itsbrief contents:—
"Not wishful to intrude I have departured fur you are well again dear Pip andwill do better without
JO.
"P.S. Ever the best of friends."
Enclosed in the letter was a receipt for the debt and costs on which I had beenarrested. Down to that moment, I had vainly supposed that my creditor hadwithdrawn, or suspended proceedings until I should be quite recovered. I hadnever dreamed of Joe's having paid the money; but Joe had paid it, and thereceipt was in his name.
What remained for me now, but to follow him to the dear old forge, and there tohave out my disclosure to him, and my penitent remonstrance with him, and thereto relieve my mind and heart of that reserved Secondly, which had begun as avague something lingering in my thoughts, and had formed into a settledpurpose?
The purpose was, that I would go to Biddy, that I would show her how humbledand repentant I came back, that I would tell her how I had lost all I oncehoped for, that I would remind her of our old confidences in my first unhappytime. Then I would say to her, "Biddy, I think you once liked me very well,when my errant heart, even while it strayed away from you, was quieter andbetter with you than it ever has been since. If you can like me only half aswell once more, if you can take me with all my faults and disappointments on myhead, if you can receive me like a forgiven child (and indeed I am as sorry,Biddy, and have as much need of a hushing voice and a soothing hand), I hope Iam a little worthier of you that I was,—not much, but a little. And, Biddy, itshall rest with you to say whether I shall work at the forge with Joe, orwhether I shall try for any different occupation down in this country, orwhether we shall go away to a distant place where an opportunity awaits mewhich I set aside, when it was offered, until I knew your answer. And now, dearBiddy, if you can tell me that you will go through the world with me, you willsurely make it a better world for me, and me a better man for it, and I willtry hard to make it a better world for you."
Such was my purpose. After three days more of recovery, I went down to the oldplace to put it in execution. And how I sped in it is all I have left to tell.
