
Chapter LVIII.
Thetidings of my high fortunes having had a heavy fall had got down to my nativeplace and its neighbourhood before I got there. I found the Blue Boar inpossession of the intelligence, and I found that it made a great change in theBoar's demeanour. Whereas the Boar had cultivated my good opinion with warmassiduity when I was coming into property, the Boar was exceedingly cool on thesubject now that I was going out of property.
It was evening when I arrived, much fatigued by the journey I had so often madeso easily. The Boar could not put me into my usual bedroom, which was engaged(probably by some one who had expectations), and could only assign me a veryindifferent chamber among the pigeons and post-chaises up the yard. But I hadas sound a sleep in that lodging as in the most superior accommodation the Boarcould have given me, and the quality of my dreams was about the same as in thebest bedroom.
Early in the morning, while my breakfast was getting ready, I strolled round bySatis House. There were printed bills on the gate and on bits of carpet hangingout of the windows, announcing a sale by auction of the Household Furniture andEffects, next week. The House itself was to be sold as old building materials,and pulled down. LOT 1 was marked in whitewashed knock-kneeletters on the brew house; LOT 2 on that part of the mainbuilding which had been so long shut up. Other lots were marked off on otherparts of the structure, and the ivy had been torn down to make room for theinscriptions, and much of it trailed low in the dust and was withered already.Stepping in for a moment at the open gate, and looking around me with theuncomfortable air of a stranger who had no business there, I saw theauctioneer's clerk walking on the casks and telling them off for theinformation of a catalogue-compiler, pen in hand, who made a temporary desk ofthe wheeled chair I had so often pushed along to the tune of Old Clem.
When I got back to my breakfast in the Boar's coffee-room, I found Mr.Pumblechook conversing with the landlord. Mr. Pumblechook (not improved inappearance by his late nocturnal adventure) was waiting for me, and addressedme in the following terms:—
"Young man, I am sorry to see you brought low. But what else could be expected!what else could be expected!"
As he extended his hand with a magnificently forgiving air, and as I was brokenby illness and unfit to quarrel, I took it.
"William," said Mr. Pumblechook to the waiter, "put a muffin on table. And hasit come to this! Has it come to this!"
I frowningly sat down to my breakfast. Mr. Pumblechook stood over me and pouredout my tea—before I could touch the teapot—with the air of a benefactor who wasresolved to be true to the last.
"William," said Mr. Pumblechook, mournfully, "put the salt on. In happiertimes," addressing me, "I think you took sugar? And did you take milk? You did.Sugar and milk. William, bring a watercress."
"Thank you," said I, shortly, "but I don't eat watercresses."
"You don't eat 'em," returned Mr. Pumblechook, sighing and nodding his headseveral times, as if he might have expected that, and as if abstinence fromwatercresses were consistent with my downfall. "True. The simple fruits of theearth. No. You needn't bring any, William."
I went on with my breakfast, and Mr. Pumblechook continued to stand over me,staring fishily and breathing noisily, as he always did.
"Little more than skin and bone!" mused Mr. Pumblechook, aloud. "And yet whenhe went from here (I may say with my blessing), and I spread afore him myhumble store, like the Bee, he was as plump as a Peach!"
This reminded me of the wonderful difference between the servile manner inwhich he had offered his hand in my new prosperity, saying, "May I?" and theostentatious clemency with which he had just now exhibited the same fat fivefingers.
"Hah!" he went on, handing me the bread and butter. "And air you a-going toJoseph?"
"In heaven's name," said I, firing in spite of myself, "what does it matter toyou where I am going? Leave that teapot alone."
It was the worst course I could have taken, because it gave Pumblechook theopportunity he wanted.
"Yes, young man," said he, releasing the handle of the article in question,retiring a step or two from my table, and speaking for the behoof of thelandlord and waiter at the door, "I will leave that teapot alone. Youare right, young man. For once you are right. I forgit myself when I take suchan interest in your breakfast, as to wish your frame, exhausted by thedebilitating effects of prodigygality, to be stimilated by the 'olesomenourishment of your forefathers. And yet," said Pumblechook, turning to thelandlord and waiter, and pointing me out at arm's length, "this is him as Iever sported with in his days of happy infancy! Tell me not it cannot be; Itell you this is him!"
A low murmur from the two replied. The waiter appeared to be particularlyaffected.
"This is him," said Pumblechook, "as I have rode in my shay-cart. This is himas I have seen brought up by hand. This is him untoe the sister of which I wasuncle by marriage, as her name was Georgiana M'ria from her own mother, let himdeny it if he can!"
The waiter seemed convinced that I could not deny it, and that it gave the casea black look.
"Young man," said Pumblechook, screwing his head at me in the old fashion, "youair a-going to Joseph. What does it matter to me, you ask me, where you aira-going? I say to you, Sir, you air a-going to Joseph."
The waiter coughed, as if he modestly invited me to get over that.
"Now," said Pumblechook, and all this with a most exasperating air of saying inthe cause of virtue what was perfectly convincing and conclusive, "I will tellyou what to say to Joseph. Here is Squires of the Boar present, known andrespected in this town, and here is William, which his father's name wasPotkins if I do not deceive myself."
"You do not, sir," said William.
"In their presence," pursued Pumblechook, "I will tell you, young man, what tosay to Joseph. Says you, "Joseph, I have this day seen my earliest benefactorand the founder of my fortun's. I will name no names, Joseph, but so they arepleased to call him up town, and I have seen that man."
"I swear I don't see him here," said I.
"Say that likewise," retorted Pumblechook. "Say you said that, and even Josephwill probably betray surprise."
"There you quite mistake him," said I. "I know better."
"Says you," Pumblechook went on, "‘Joseph, I have seen that man, and that manbears you no malice and bears me no malice. He knows your character, Joseph,and is well acquainted with your pig-headedness and ignorance; and he knows mycharacter, Joseph, and he knows my want of gratitoode. Yes, Joseph,' says you,"here Pumblechook shook his head and hand at me, "‘he knows my total deficiencyof common human gratitoode. He knows it, Joseph, as none can. Youdo not know it, Joseph, having no call to know it, but that man do.'"
Windy donkey as he was, it really amazed me that he could have the face to talkthus to mine.
"Says you, ‘Joseph, he gave me a little message, which I will now repeat. Itwas that, in my being brought low, he saw the finger of Providence. He knowedthat finger when he saw Joseph, and he saw it plain. It pinted out thiswriting, Joseph. Reward of ingratitoode to his earliest benefactor, andfounder of fortun's. But that man said he did not repent of what he haddone, Joseph. Not at all. It was right to do it, it was kind to do it, it wasbenevolent to do it, and he would do it again.'"
"It's pity," said I, scornfully, as I finished my interrupted breakfast, "thatthe man did not say what he had done and would do again."
"Squires of the Boar!" Pumblechook was now addressing the landlord, "andWilliam! I have no objections to your mentioning, either up town or down town,if such should be your wishes, that it was right to do it, kind to do it,benevolent to do it, and that I would do it again."
With those words the Impostor shook them both by the hand, with an air, andleft the house; leaving me much more astonished than delighted by the virtuesof that same indefinite "it." I was not long after him in leaving the housetoo, and when I went down the High Street I saw him holding forth (no doubt tothe same effect) at his shop door to a select group, who honoured me with veryunfavourable glances as I passed on the opposite side of the way.
But, it was only the pleasanter to turn to Biddy and to Joe, whose greatforbearance shone more brightly than before, if that could be, contrasted withthis brazen pretender. I went towards them slowly, for my limbs were weak, butwith a sense of increasing relief as I drew nearer to them, and a sense ofleaving arrogance and untruthfulness further and further behind.
The June weather was delicious. The sky was blue, the larks were soaring highover the green corn, I thought all that countryside more beautiful and peacefulby far than I had ever known it to be yet. Many pleasant pictures of the lifethat I would lead there, and of the change for the better that would come overmy character when I had a guiding spirit at my side whose simple faith andclear home wisdom I had proved, beguiled my way. They awakened a tender emotionin me; for my heart was softened by my return, and such a change had come topass, that I felt like one who was toiling home barefoot from distant travel,and whose wanderings had lasted many years.
The schoolhouse where Biddy was mistress I had never seen; but, the littleroundabout lane by which I entered the village, for quietness' sake, took mepast it. I was disappointed to find that the day was a holiday; no childrenwere there, and Biddy's house was closed. Some hopeful notion of seeing her,busily engaged in her daily duties, before she saw me, had been in my mind andwas defeated.
But the forge was a very short distance off, and I went towards it under thesweet green limes, listening for the clink of Joe's hammer. Long after I oughtto have heard it, and long after I had fancied I heard it and found it but afancy, all was still. The limes were there, and the white thorns were there,and the chestnut-trees were there, and their leaves rustled harmoniously when Istopped to listen; but, the clink of Joe's hammer was not in the midsummerwind.
Almost fearing, without knowing why, to come in view of the forge, I saw it atlast, and saw that it was closed. No gleam of fire, no glittering shower ofsparks, no roar of bellows; all shut up, and still.
But the house was not deserted, and the best parlour seemed to be in use, forthere were white curtains fluttering in its window, and the window was open andgay with flowers. I went softly towards it, meaning to peep over the flowers,when Joe and Biddy stood before me, arm in arm.
At first Biddy gave a cry, as if she thought it was my apparition, but inanother moment she was in my embrace. I wept to see her, and she wept to seeme; I, because she looked so fresh and pleasant; she, because I looked so wornand white.
"But dear Biddy, how smart you are!"
"Yes, dear Pip."
"And Joe, how smart you are!"
"Yes, dear old Pip, old chap."
I looked at both of them, from one to the other, and then—
"It's my wedding-day!" cried Biddy, in a burst of happiness, "and I am marriedto Joe!"
They had taken me into the kitchen, and I had laid my head down on the old dealtable. Biddy held one of my hands to her lips, and Joe's restoring touch was onmy shoulder. "Which he warn't strong enough, my dear, fur to be surprised,"said Joe. And Biddy said, "I ought to have thought of it, dear Joe, but I wastoo happy." They were both so overjoyed to see me, so proud to see me, sotouched by my coming to them, so delighted that I should have come by accidentto make their day complete!
My first thought was one of great thankfulness that I had never breathed thislast baffled hope to Joe. How often, while he was with me in my illness, had itrisen to my lips! How irrevocable would have been his knowledge of it, if hehad remained with me but another hour!
"Dear Biddy," said I, "you have the best husband in the whole world, and if youcould have seen him by my bed you would have—But no, you couldn't love himbetter than you do."
"No, I couldn't indeed," said Biddy.
"And, dear Joe, you have the best wife in the whole world, and she will makeyou as happy as even you deserve to be, you dear, good, noble Joe!"
Joe looked at me with a quivering lip, and fairly put his sleeve before hiseyes.
"And Joe and Biddy both, as you have been to church to-day, and are in charityand love with all mankind, receive my humble thanks for all you have done forme, and all I have so ill repaid! And when I say that I am going away withinthe hour, for I am soon going abroad, and that I shall never rest until I haveworked for the money with which you have kept me out of prison, and have sentit to you, don't think, dear Joe and Biddy, that if I could repay it a thousandtimes over, I suppose I could cancel a farthing of the debt I owe you, or thatI would do so if I could!"
They were both melted by these words, and both entreated me to say no more.
"But I must say more. Dear Joe, I hope you will have children to love, and thatsome little fellow will sit in this chimney-corner of a winter night, who mayremind you of another little fellow gone out of it for ever. Don't tell him,Joe, that I was thankless; don't tell him, Biddy, that I was ungenerous andunjust; only tell him that I honoured you both, because you were both so goodand true, and that, as your child, I said it would be natural to him to grow upa much better man than I did."
"I ain't a-going," said Joe, from behind his sleeve, "to tell him nothink o'that natur, Pip. Nor Biddy ain't. Nor yet no one ain't."
"And now, though I know you have already done it in your own kind hearts, praytell me, both, that you forgive me! Pray let me hear you say the words, that Imay carry the sound of them away with me, and then I shall be able to believethat you can trust me, and think better of me, in the time to come!"
"O dear old Pip, old chap," said Joe. "God knows as I forgive you, if I haveanythink to forgive!"
"Amen! And God knows I do!" echoed Biddy.
"Now let me go up and look at my old little room, and rest there a few minutesby myself. And then, when I have eaten and drunk with you, go with me as far asthe finger-post, dear Joe and Biddy, before we say good-bye!"
I sold all I had, and put aside as much as I could, for a composition with mycreditors,—who gave me ample time to pay them in full,—and I went out andjoined Herbert. Within a month, I had quitted England, and within two months Iwas clerk to Clarriker and Co., and within four months I assumed my firstundivided responsibility. For the beam across the parlour ceiling at Mill PondBank had then ceased to tremble under old Bill Barley's growls and was atpeace, and Herbert had gone away to marry Clara, and I was left in sole chargeof the Eastern Branch until he brought her back.
Many a year went round before I was a partner in the House; but I lived happilywith Herbert and his wife, and lived frugally, and paid my debts, andmaintained a constant correspondence with Biddy and Joe. It was not until Ibecame third in the Firm, that Clarriker betrayed me to Herbert; but he thendeclared that the secret of Herbert's partnership had been long enough upon hisconscience, and he must tell it. So he told it, and Herbert was as much movedas amazed, and the dear fellow and I were not the worse friends for the longconcealment. I must not leave it to be supposed that we were ever a greatHouse, or that we made mints of money. We were not in a grand way of business,but we had a good name, and worked for our profits, and did very well. We owedso much to Herbert's ever cheerful industry and readiness, that I oftenwondered how I had conceived that old idea of his inaptitude, until I was oneday enlightened by the reflection, that perhaps the inaptitude had never beenin him at all, but had been in me.
