
Chapter VI.
Mystate of mind regarding the pilfering from which I had been so unexpectedlyexonerated did not impel me to frank disclosure; but I hope it had some dregsof good at the bottom of it.
I do not recall that I felt any tenderness of conscience in reference to Mrs.Joe, when the fear of being found out was lifted off me. But I lovedJoe,—perhaps for no better reason in those early days than because the dearfellow let me love him,—and, as to him, my inner self was not so easilycomposed. It was much upon my mind (particularly when I first saw him lookingabout for his file) that I ought to tell Joe the whole truth. Yet I did not,and for the reason that I mistrusted that if I did, he would think me worsethan I was. The fear of losing Joe's confidence, and of thenceforth sitting inthe chimney corner at night staring drearily at my forever lost companion andfriend, tied up my tongue. I morbidly represented to myself that if Joe knewit, I never afterwards could see him at the fireside feeling his fair whisker,without thinking that he was meditating on it. That, if Joe knew it, I neverafterwards could see him glance, however casually, at yesterday's meat orpudding when it came on to-day's table, without thinking that he was debatingwhether I had been in the pantry. That, if Joe knew it, and at any subsequentperiod of our joint domestic life remarked that his beer was flat or thick, theconviction that he suspected tar in it, would bring a rush of blood to my face.In a word, I was too cowardly to do what I knew to be right, as I had been toocowardly to avoid doing what I knew to be wrong. I had had no intercourse withthe world at that time, and I imitated none of its many inhabitants who act inthis manner. Quite an untaught genius, I made the discovery of the line ofaction for myself.
As I was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship, Joe took me onhis back again and carried me home. He must have had a tiresome journey of it,for Mr. Wopsle, being knocked up, was in such a very bad temper that if theChurch had been thrown open, he would probably have excommunicated the wholeexpedition, beginning with Joe and myself. In his lay capacity, he persisted insitting down in the damp to such an insane extent, that when his coat was takenoff to be dried at the kitchen fire, the circumstantial evidence on histrousers would have hanged him, if it had been a capital offence.
By that time, I was staggering on the kitchen floor like a little drunkard,through having been newly set upon my feet, and through having been fastasleep, and through waking in the heat and lights and noise of tongues. As Icame to myself (with the aid of a heavy thump between the shoulders, and therestorative exclamation "Yah! Was there ever such a boy as this!" from mysister,) I found Joe telling them about the convict's confession, and all thevisitors suggesting different ways by which he had got into the pantry. Mr.Pumblechook made out, after carefully surveying the premises, that he had firstgot upon the roof of the forge, and had then got upon the roof of the house,and had then let himself down the kitchen chimney by a rope made of his beddingcut into strips; and as Mr. Pumblechook was very positive and drove his ownchaise-cart—over everybody—it was agreed that it must be so. Mr. Wopsle,indeed, wildly cried out, "No!" with the feeble malice of a tired man; but, ashe had no theory, and no coat on, he was unanimously set at naught,—not tomention his smoking hard behind, as he stood with his back to the kitchen fireto draw the damp out: which was not calculated to inspire confidence.
This was all I heard that night before my sister clutched me, as a slumberousoffence to the company's eyesight, and assisted me up to bed with such a stronghand that I seemed to have fifty boots on, and to be dangling them all againstthe edges of the stairs. My state of mind, as I have described it, began beforeI was up in the morning, and lasted long after the subject had died out, andhad ceased to be mentioned saving on exceptional occasions.
