
Chapter VII.
At thetime when I stood in the churchyard reading the family tombstones, I had justenough learning to be able to spell them out. My construction even of theirsimple meaning was not very correct, for I read "wife of the Above" as acomplimentary reference to my father's exaltation to a better world; and if anyone of my deceased relations had been referred to as "Below," I have no doubt Ishould have formed the worst opinions of that member of the family. Neitherwere my notions of the theological positions to which my Catechism bound me, atall accurate; for, I have a lively remembrance that I supposed my declarationthat I was to "walk in the same all the days of my life," laid me under anobligation always to go through the village from our house in one particulardirection, and never to vary it by turning down by the wheelwright's or up bythe mill.
When I was old enough, I was to be apprenticed to Joe, and until I could assumethat dignity I was not to be what Mrs. Joe called "Pompeyed," or (as I renderit) pampered. Therefore, I was not only odd-boy about the forge, but if anyneighbour happened to want an extra boy to frighten birds, or pick up stones,or do any such job, I was favoured with the employment. In order, however, thatour superior position might not be compromised thereby, a money-box was kept onthe kitchen mantel-shelf, into which it was publicly made known that all myearnings were dropped. I have an impression that they were to be contributedeventually towards the liquidation of the National Debt, but I know I had nohope of any personal participation in the treasure.
Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt kept an evening school in the village; that is to say,she was a ridiculous old woman of limited means and unlimited infirmity, whoused to go to sleep from six to seven every evening, in the society of youthwho paid two pence per week each, for the improving opportunity of seeing herdo it. She rented a small cottage, and Mr. Wopsle had the room upstairs, wherewe students used to overhear him reading aloud in a most dignified and terrificmanner, and occasionally bumping on the ceiling. There was a fiction that Mr.Wopsle "examined" the scholars once a quarter. What he did on those occasionswas to turn up his cuffs, stick up his hair, and give us Mark Antony's orationover the body of Caesar. This was always followed by Collins's Ode on thePassions, wherein I particularly venerated Mr. Wopsle as Revenge throwing hisblood-stained sword in thunder down, and taking the War-denouncing trumpet witha withering look. It was not with me then, as it was in later life, when I fellinto the society of the Passions, and compared them with Collins and Wopsle,rather to the disadvantage of both gentlemen.
Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt, besides keeping this Educational Institution, kept inthe same room—a little general shop. She had no idea what stock she had, orwhat the price of anything in it was; but there was a little greasymemorandum-book kept in a drawer, which served as a Catalogue of Prices, and bythis oracle Biddy arranged all the shop transactions. Biddy was Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt's granddaughter; I confess myself quite unequal to the working outof the problem, what relation she was to Mr. Wopsle. She was an orphan likemyself; like me, too, had been brought up by hand. She was most noticeable, Ithought, in respect of her extremities; for, her hair always wanted brushing,her hands always wanted washing, and her shoes always wanted mending andpulling up at heel. This description must be received with a week-daylimitation. On Sundays, she went to church elaborated.
Much of my unassisted self, and more by the help of Biddy than of Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt, I struggled through the alphabet as if it had been a bramble-bush;getting considerably worried and scratched by every letter. After that I fellamong those thieves, the nine figures, who seemed every evening to do somethingnew to disguise themselves and baffle recognition. But, at last I began, in apurblind groping way, to read, write, and cipher, on the very smallest scale.
One night I was sitting in the chimney corner with my slate, expending greatefforts on the production of a letter to Joe. I think it must have been a fullyear after our hunt upon the marshes, for it was a long time after, and it waswinter and a hard frost. With an alphabet on the hearth at my feet forreference, I contrived in an hour or two to print and smear this epistle:—
"MI DEER JO i OPE UR KRWITE WELL iOPE i SHAL SONB HABELL 4 2 TEEDGEU JO AN THEN WESHORL B SOGLODD AN WEN i MPRENGTD 2 U JO WOTLARX AN BLEVEME INF XN PIP."
There was no indispensable necessity for my communicating with Joe by letter,inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were alone. But I delivered this writtencommunication (slate and all) with my own hand, and Joe received it as amiracle of erudition.
"I say, Pip, old chap!" cried Joe, opening his blue eyes wide, "what a scholaryou are! An't you?"
"I should like to be," said I, glancing at the slate as he held it; with amisgiving that the writing was rather hilly.
"Why, here's a J," said Joe, "and a O equal to anythink! Here's a J and a O,Pip, and a J-O, Joe."




I had never heard Joe read aloud to any greater extent than this monosyllable,and I had observed at church last Sunday, when I accidentally held ourPrayer-Book upside down, that it seemed to suit his convenience quite as wellas if it had been all right. Wishing to embrace the present occasion of findingout whether in teaching Joe, I should have to begin quite at the beginning, Isaid, "Ah! But read the rest, Jo."
"The rest, eh, Pip?" said Joe, looking at it with a slow, searching eye, "One,two, three. Why, here's three Js, and three Os, and three J-O, Joes in it,Pip!"
I leaned over Joe, and, with the aid of my forefinger read him the wholeletter.
"Astonishing!" said Joe, when I had finished. "You ARE ascholar."
"How do you spell Gargery, Joe?" I asked him, with a modest patronage.
"I don't spell it at all," said Joe.
"But supposing you did?"
"It can't be supposed," said Joe. "Tho' I'm uncommon fond of reading,too."
"Are you, Joe?"
"On-common. Give me," said Joe, "a good book, or a good newspaper, and sit medown afore a good fire, and I ask no better. Lord!" he continued, after rubbinghis knees a little, "when you do come to a J and a O, and says you,‘Here, at last, is a J-O, Joe,' how interesting reading is!"
I derived from this, that Joe's education, like Steam, was yet in its infancy.Pursuing the subject, I inquired,—
"Didn't you ever go to school, Joe, when you were as little as me?"
"No, Pip."
"Why didn't you ever go to school, Joe, when you were as little as me?"
"Well, Pip," said Joe, taking up the poker, and settling himself to his usualoccupation when he was thoughtful, of slowly raking the fire between the lowerbars; "I'll tell you. My father, Pip, he were given to drink, and when he wereovertook with drink, he hammered away at my mother, most onmerciful. It werea'most the only hammering he did, indeed, 'xcepting at myself. And he hammeredat me with a wigor only to be equalled by the wigor with which he didn't hammerat his anwil.—You're a listening and understanding, Pip?"
"Yes, Joe."
"Consequence, my mother and me we ran away from my father several times; andthen my mother she'd go out to work, and she'd say, "Joe," she'd say, "now,please God, you shall have some schooling, child," and she'd put me to school.But my father were that good in his hart that he couldn't abear to be withoutus. So, he'd come with a most tremenjous crowd and make such a row at the doorsof the houses where we was, that they used to be obligated to have no more todo with us and to give us up to him. And then he took us home and hammered us.Which, you see, Pip," said Joe, pausing in his meditative raking of the fire,and looking at me, "were a drawback on my learning."
"Certainly, poor Joe!"
"Though mind you, Pip," said Joe, with a judicial touch or two of the poker onthe top bar, "rendering unto all their doo, and maintaining equal justicebetwixt man and man, my father were that good in his hart, don't you see?"
I didn't see; but I didn't say so.
"Well!" Joe pursued, "somebody must keep the pot a-biling, Pip, or the potwon't bile, don't you know?"
I saw that, and said so.
"Consequence, my father didn't make objections to my going to work; so I wentto work at my present calling, which were his too, if he would have followedit, and I worked tolerable hard, I assure you, Pip. In time I were ableto keep him, and I kep him till he went off in a purple leptic fit. And it weremy intentions to have had put upon his tombstone that, Whatsume'er the failingson his part, Remember reader he were that good in his heart."
Joe recited this couplet with such manifest pride and careful perspicuity, thatI asked him if he had made it himself.
"I made it," said Joe, "my own self. I made it in a moment. It was likestriking out a horseshoe complete, in a single blow. I never was so muchsurprised in all my life,—couldn't credit my own ed,—to tell you the truth,hardly believed it were my own ed. As I was saying, Pip, it were myintentions to have had it cut over him; but poetry costs money, cut it how youwill, small or large, and it were not done. Not to mention bearers, all themoney that could be spared were wanted for my mother. She were in poor elth,and quite broke. She weren't long of following, poor soul, and her share ofpeace come round at last."
Joe's blue eyes turned a little watery; he rubbed first one of them, and thenthe other, in a most uncongenial and uncomfortable manner, with the round knobon the top of the poker.
"It were but lonesome then," said Joe, "living here alone, and I got acquaintedwith your sister. Now, Pip,"—Joe looked firmly at me as if he knew I was notgoing to agree with him;—"your sister is a fine figure of a woman."
I could not help looking at the fire, in an obvious state of doubt.
"Whatever family opinions, or whatever the world's opinions, on that subjectmay be, Pip, your sister is," Joe tapped the top bar with the poker after everyword following, "a-fine-figure—of—a—woman!"
I could think of nothing better to say than "I am glad you think so, Joe."
"So am I," returned Joe, catching me up. "I am glad I think so, Pip. Alittle redness or a little matter of Bone, here or there, what does it signifyto Me?"
I sagaciously observed, if it didn't signify to him, to whom did it signify?
"Certainly!" assented Joe. "That's it. You're right, old chap! When I gotacquainted with your sister, it were the talk how she was bringing you up byhand. Very kind of her too, all the folks said, and I said, along with all thefolks. As to you," Joe pursued with a countenance expressive of seeingsomething very nasty indeed, "if you could have been aware how small and flabbyand mean you was, dear me, you'd have formed the most contemptible opinion ofyourself!"
Not exactly relishing this, I said, "Never mind me, Joe."
"But I did mind you, Pip," he returned with tender simplicity. "When I offeredto your sister to keep company, and to be asked in church at such times as shewas willing and ready to come to the forge, I said to her, ‘And bring the poorlittle child. God bless the poor little child,' I said to your sister, ‘there'sroom for him at the forge!'"
I broke out crying and begging pardon, and hugged Joe round the neck: whodropped the poker to hug me, and to say, "Ever the best of friends; an't us,Pip? Don't cry, old chap!"
When this little interruption was over, Joe resumed:—
"Well, you see, Pip, and here we are! That's about where it lights; here weare! Now, when you take me in hand in my learning, Pip (and I tell youbeforehand I am awful dull, most awful dull), Mrs. Joe mustn't see too much ofwhat we're up to. It must be done, as I may say, on the sly. And why on thesly? I'll tell you why, Pip."
He had taken up the poker again; without which, I doubt if he could haveproceeded in his demonstration.
"Your sister is given to government."
"Given to government, Joe?" I was startled, for I had some shadowy idea (and Iam afraid I must add, hope) that Joe had divorced her in a favour of the Lordsof the Admiralty, or Treasury.
"Given to government," said Joe. "Which I meantersay the government of you andmyself."
"Oh!"
"And she an't over partial to having scholars on the premises," Joe continued,"and in partickler would not be over partial to my being a scholar, for fear asI might rise. Like a sort of rebel, don't you see?"
I was going to retort with an inquiry, and had got as far as "Why—" when Joestopped me.
"Stay a bit. I know what you're a-going to say, Pip; stay a bit! I don't denythat your sister comes the Mo-gul over us, now and again. I don't deny that shedo throw us back-falls, and that she do drop down upon us heavy. At such timesas when your sister is on the Ram-page, Pip," Joe sank his voice to a whisperand glanced at the door, "candour compels fur to admit that she is a Buster."
Joe pronounced this word, as if it began with at least twelve capital Bs.
"Why don't I rise? That were your observation when I broke it off, Pip?"
"Yes, Joe."
"Well," said Joe, passing the poker into his left hand, that he might feel hiswhisker; and I had no hope of him whenever he took to that placid occupation;"your sister's a master-mind. A master-mind."
"What's that?" I asked, in some hope of bringing him to a stand. But Joe wasreadier with his definition than I had expected, and completely stopped me byarguing circularly, and answering with a fixed look, "Her."
"And I ain't a master-mind," Joe resumed, when he had unfixed his look, and gotback to his whisker. "And last of all, Pip,—and this I want to say very seriousto you, old chap,—I see so much in my poor mother, of a woman drudging andslaving and breaking her honest hart and never getting no peace in her mortaldays, that I'm dead afeerd of going wrong in the way of not doing what's rightby a woman, and I'd fur rather of the two go wrong the t'other way, and be alittle ill-conwenienced myself. I wish it was only me that got put out, Pip; Iwish there warn't no Tickler for you, old chap; I wish I could take it all onmyself; but this is the up-and-down-and-straight on it, Pip, and I hope you'lloverlook shortcomings."
Young as I was, I believe that I dated a new admiration of Joe from that night.We were equals afterwards, as we had been before; but, afterwards at quiettimes when I sat looking at Joe and thinking about him, I had a new sensationof feeling conscious that I was looking up to Joe in my heart.
"However," said Joe, rising to replenish the fire; "here's the Dutch-clocka-working himself up to being equal to strike Eight of 'em, and she's not comehome yet! I hope Uncle Pumblechook's mare mayn't have set a forefoot on a pieceo' ice, and gone down."
Mrs. Joe made occasional trips with Uncle Pumblechook on market-days, to assisthim in buying such household stuffs and goods as required a woman's judgment;Uncle Pumblechook being a bachelor and reposing no confidences in his domesticservant. This was market-day, and Mrs. Joe was out on one of these expeditions.
Joe made the fire and swept the hearth, and then we went to the door to listenfor the chaise-cart. It was a dry cold night, and the wind blew keenly, and thefrost was white and hard. A man would die to-night of lying out on the marshes,I thought. And then I looked at the stars, and considered how awful it would befor a man to turn his face up to them as he froze to death, and see no help orpity in all the glittering multitude.
"Here comes the mare," said Joe, "ringing like a peal of bells!"
The sound of her iron shoes upon the hard road was quite musical, as she camealong at a much brisker trot than usual. We got a chair out, ready for Mrs.Joe's alighting, and stirred up the fire that they might see a bright window,and took a final survey of the kitchen that nothing might be out of its place.When we had completed these preparations, they drove up, wrapped to the eyes.Mrs. Joe was soon landed, and Uncle Pumblechook was soon down too, covering themare with a cloth, and we were soon all in the kitchen, carrying so much coldair in with us that it seemed to drive all the heat out of the fire.
"Now," said Mrs. Joe, unwrapping herself with haste and excitement, andthrowing her bonnet back on her shoulders where it hung by the strings, "ifthis boy ain't grateful this night, he never will be!"
I looked as grateful as any boy possibly could, who was wholly uninformed whyhe ought to assume that expression.
"It's only to be hoped," said my sister, "that he won't be Pompeyed. But I havemy fears."
"She ain't in that line, Mum," said Mr. Pumblechook. "She knows better."
She? I looked at Joe, making the motion with my lips and eyebrows, "She?" Joelooked at me, making the motion with his lips and eyebrows, "She?" Mysister catching him in the act, he drew the back of his hand across his nosewith his usual conciliatory air on such occasions, and looked at her.
"Well?" said my sister, in her snappish way. "What are you staring at? Is thehouse afire?"
"—Which some individual," Joe politely hinted, "mentioned—she."
"And she is a she, I suppose?" said my sister. "Unless you call Miss Havisham ahe. And I doubt if even you'll go so far as that."
"Miss Havisham, up town?" said Joe.
"Is there any Miss Havisham down town?" returned my sister.
"She wants this boy to go and play there. And of course he's going. And he hadbetter play there," said my sister, shaking her head at me as an encouragementto be extremely light and sportive, "or I'll work him."
I had heard of Miss Havisham up town,—everybody for miles round had heard ofMiss Havisham up town,—as an immensely rich and grim lady who lived in a largeand dismal house barricaded against robbers, and who led a life of seclusion.
"Well to be sure!" said Joe, astounded. "I wonder how she come to know Pip!"
"Noodle!" cried my sister. "Who said she knew him?"
"—Which some individual," Joe again politely hinted, "mentioned that she wantedhim to go and play there."
"And couldn't she ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a boy to go and playthere? Isn't it just barely possible that Uncle Pumblechook may be a tenant ofhers, and that he may sometimes—we won't say quarterly or half-yearly, for thatwould be requiring too much of you—but sometimes—go there to pay his rent? Andcouldn't she then ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a boy to go and playthere? And couldn't Uncle Pumblechook, being always considerate and thoughtfulfor us—though you may not think it, Joseph," in a tone of the deepest reproach,as if he were the most callous of nephews, "then mention this boy, standingPrancing here"—which I solemnly declare I was not doing—"that I have for everbeen a willing slave to?"
"Good again!" cried Uncle Pumblechook. "Well put! Prettily pointed! Goodindeed! Now Joseph, you know the case."
"No, Joseph," said my sister, still in a reproachful manner, while Joeapologetically drew the back of his hand across and across his nose, "you donot yet—though you may not think it—know the case. You may consider that youdo, but you do not, Joseph. For you do not know that Uncle Pumblechook,being sensible that for anything we can tell, this boy's fortune may be made byhis going to Miss Havisham's, has offered to take him into town to-night in hisown chaise-cart, and to keep him to-night, and to take him with his own handsto Miss Havisham's to-morrow morning. And Lor-a-mussy me!" cried my sister,casting off her bonnet in sudden desperation, "here I stand talking to mereMooncalfs, with Uncle Pumblechook waiting, and the mare catching cold at thedoor, and the boy grimed with crock and dirt from the hair of his head to thesole of his foot!"
With that, she pounced upon me, like an eagle on a lamb, and my face wassqueezed into wooden bowls in sinks, and my head was put under taps ofwater-butts, and I was soaped, and kneaded, and towelled, and thumped, andharrowed, and rasped, until I really was quite beside myself. (I may hereremark that I suppose myself to be better acquainted than any living authority,with the ridgy effect of a wedding-ring, passing unsympathetically over thehuman countenance.)
When my ablutions were completed, I was put into clean linen of the stiffestcharacter, like a young penitent into sackcloth, and was trussed up in mytightest and fearfullest suit. I was then delivered over to Mr. Pumblechook,who formally received me as if he were the Sheriff, and who let off upon me thespeech that I knew he had been dying to make all along: "Boy, be forevergrateful to all friends, but especially unto them which brought you up byhand!"
"Good-bye, Joe!"
"God bless you, Pip, old chap!"
I had never parted from him before, and what with my feelings and what withsoapsuds, I could at first see no stars from the chaise-cart. But they twinkledout one by one, without throwing any light on the questions why on earth I wasgoing to play at Miss Havisham's, and what on earth I was expected to play at.
