
Chapter VIII.
Mr.Pumblechook's premises in the High Street of the market town, were of apeppercorny and farinaceous character, as the premises of a cornchandler andseedsman should be. It appeared to me that he must be a very happy man indeed,to have so many little drawers in his shop; and I wondered when I peeped intoone or two on the lower tiers, and saw the tied-up brown paper packets inside,whether the flower-seeds and bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out ofthose jails, and bloom.
It was in the early morning after my arrival that I entertained thisspeculation. On the previous night, I had been sent straight to bed in an atticwith a sloping roof, which was so low in the corner where the bedstead was,that I calculated the tiles as being within a foot of my eyebrows. In the sameearly morning, I discovered a singular affinity between seeds and corduroys.Mr. Pumblechook wore corduroys, and so did his shopman; and somehow, there wasa general air and flavour about the corduroys, so much in the nature of seeds,and a general air and flavour about the seeds, so much in the nature ofcorduroys, that I hardly knew which was which. The same opportunity served mefor noticing that Mr. Pumblechook appeared to conduct his business by lookingacross the street at the saddler, who appeared to transact his businessby keeping his eye on the coachmaker, who appeared to get on in life by puttinghis hands in his pockets and contemplating the baker, who in his turn foldedhis arms and stared at the grocer, who stood at his door and yawned at thechemist. The watchmaker, always poring over a little desk with amagnifying-glass at his eye, and always inspected by a group of smock-frocksporing over him through the glass of his shop-window, seemed to be about theonly person in the High Street whose trade engaged his attention.
Mr. Pumblechook and I breakfasted at eight o'clock in the parlour behind theshop, while the shopman took his mug of tea and hunch of bread and butter on asack of peas in the front premises. I considered Mr. Pumblechook wretchedcompany. Besides being possessed by my sister's idea that a mortifying andpenitential character ought to be imparted to my diet,—besides giving me asmuch crumb as possible in combination with as little butter, and putting such aquantity of warm water into my milk that it would have been more candid to haveleft the milk out altogether,—his conversation consisted of nothing butarithmetic. On my politely bidding him Good-morning, he said, pompously, "Seventimes nine, boy?" And how should I be able to answer, dodged in thatway, in a strange place, on an empty stomach! I was hungry, but before I hadswallowed a morsel, he began a running sum that lasted all through thebreakfast. "Seven?" "And four?" "And eight?" "And six?" "And two?" "And ten?"And so on. And after each figure was disposed of, it was as much as I could doto get a bite or a sup, before the next came; while he sat at his ease guessingnothing, and eating bacon and hot roll, in (if I may be allowed the expression)a gorging and gormandizing manner.
For such reasons, I was very glad when ten o'clock came and we started for MissHavisham's; though I was not at all at my ease regarding the manner in which Ishould acquit myself under that lady's roof. Within a quarter of an hour wecame to Miss Havisham's house, which was of old brick, and dismal, and had agreat many iron bars to it. Some of the windows had been walled up; of thosethat remained, all the lower were rustily barred. There was a courtyard infront, and that was barred; so we had to wait, after ringing the bell, untilsome one should come to open it. While we waited at the gate, I peeped in (eventhen Mr. Pumblechook said, "And fourteen?" but I pretended not to hear him),and saw that at the side of the house there was a large brewery. No brewing wasgoing on in it, and none seemed to have gone on for a long long time.
A window was raised, and a clear voice demanded "What name?" To which myconductor replied, "Pumblechook." The voice returned, "Quite right," and thewindow was shut again, and a young lady came across the court-yard, with keysin her hand.
"This," said Mr. Pumblechook, "is Pip."
"This is Pip, is it?" returned the young lady, who was very pretty and seemedvery proud; "come in, Pip."
Mr. Pumblechook was coming in also, when she stopped him with the gate.
"Oh!" she said. "Did you wish to see Miss Havisham?"
"If Miss Havisham wished to see me," returned Mr. Pumblechook, discomfited.
"Ah!" said the girl; "but you see she don't."
She said it so finally, and in such an undiscussible way, that Mr. Pumblechook,though in a condition of ruffled dignity, could not protest. But he eyed meseverely,—as if I had done anything to him!—and departed with the wordsreproachfully delivered: "Boy! Let your behaviour here be a credit unto themwhich brought you up by hand!" I was not free from apprehension that he wouldcome back to propound through the gate, "And sixteen?" But he didn't.
My young conductress locked the gate, and we went across the courtyard. It waspaved and clean, but grass was growing in every crevice. The brewery buildingshad a little lane of communication with it, and the wooden gates of that lanestood open, and all the brewery beyond stood open, away to the high enclosingwall; and all was empty and disused. The cold wind seemed to blow colder therethan outside the gate; and it made a shrill noise in howling in and out at theopen sides of the brewery, like the noise of wind in the rigging of a ship atsea.
She saw me looking at it, and she said, "You could drink without hurt all thestrong beer that's brewed there now, boy."
"I should think I could, miss," said I, in a shy way.
"Better not try to brew beer there now, or it would turn out sour, boy; don'tyou think so?"
"It looks like it, miss."
"Not that anybody means to try," she added, "for that's all done with, and theplace will stand as idle as it is till it falls. As to strong beer, there'senough of it in the cellars already, to drown the Manor House."




"Is that the name of this house, miss?"
"One of its names, boy."
"It has more than one, then, miss?"
"One more. Its other name was Satis; which is Greek, or Latin, or Hebrew, orall three—or all one to me—for enough."
"Enough House," said I; "that's a curious name, miss."
"Yes," she replied; "but it meant more than it said. It meant, when it wasgiven, that whoever had this house could want nothing else. They must have beeneasily satisfied in those days, I should think. But don't loiter, boy."
Though she called me "boy" so often, and with a carelessness that was far fromcomplimentary, she was of about my own age. She seemed much older than I, ofcourse, being a girl, and beautiful and self-possessed; and she was as scornfulof me as if she had been one-and-twenty, and a queen.
We went into the house by a side door, the great front entrance had two chainsacross it outside,—and the first thing I noticed was, that the passages wereall dark, and that she had left a candle burning there. She took it up, and wewent through more passages and up a staircase, and still it was all dark, andonly the candle lighted us.
At last we came to the door of a room, and she said, "Go in."
I answered, more in shyness than politeness, "After you, miss."
To this she returned: "Don't be ridiculous, boy; I am not going in." Andscornfully walked away, and—what was worse—took the candle with her.
This was very uncomfortable, and I was half afraid. However, the only thing tobe done being to knock at the door, I knocked, and was told from within toenter. I entered, therefore, and found myself in a pretty large room, welllighted with wax candles. No glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it. It was adressing-room, as I supposed from the furniture, though much of it was of formsand uses then quite unknown to me. But prominent in it was a draped table witha gilded looking-glass, and that I made out at first sight to be a fine lady'sdressing-table.
Whether I should have made out this object so soon if there had been no finelady sitting at it, I cannot say. In an arm-chair, with an elbow resting on thetable and her head leaning on that hand, sat the strangest lady I have everseen, or shall ever see.
She was dressed in rich materials,—satins, and lace, and silks,—all of white.Her shoes were white. And she had a long white veil dependent from her hair,and she had bridal flowers in her hair, but her hair was white. Some brightjewels sparkled on her neck and on her hands, and some other jewels laysparkling on the table. Dresses, less splendid than the dress she wore, andhalf-packed trunks, were scattered about. She had not quite finished dressing,for she had but one shoe on,—the other was on the table near her hand,—her veilwas but half arranged, her watch and chain were not put on, and some lace forher bosom lay with those trinkets, and with her handkerchief, and gloves, andsome flowers, and a Prayer-Book all confusedly heaped about the looking-glass.
It was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I sawmore of them in the first moments than might be supposed. But I saw thateverything within my view which ought to be white, had been white long ago, andhad lost its lustre and was faded and yellow. I saw that the bride within thebridal dress had withered like the dress, and like the flowers, and had nobrightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes. I saw that the dress hadbeen put upon the rounded figure of a young woman, and that the figure uponwhich it now hung loose had shrunk to skin and bone. Once, I had been taken tosee some ghastly waxwork at the Fair, representing I know not what impossiblepersonage lying in state. Once, I had been taken to one of our old marshchurches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug outof a vault under the church pavement. Now, waxwork and skeleton seemed to havedark eyes that moved and looked at me. I should have cried out, if I could.
"Who is it?" said the lady at the table.
"Pip, ma'am."
"Pip?"
"Mr. Pumblechook's boy, ma'am. Come—to play."
"Come nearer; let me look at you. Come close."
It was when I stood before her, avoiding her eyes, that I took note of thesurrounding objects in detail, and saw that her watch had stopped at twentyminutes to nine, and that a clock in the room had stopped at twenty minutes tonine.
"Look at me," said Miss Havisham. "You are not afraid of a woman who has neverseen the sun since you were born?"
I regret to state that I was not afraid of telling the enormous liecomprehended in the answer "No."
"Do you know what I touch here?" she said, laying her hands, one upon theother, on her left side.
"Yes, ma'am." (It made me think of the young man.)
"What do I touch?"
"Your heart."
"Broken!"
She uttered the word with an eager look, and with strong emphasis, and with aweird smile that had a kind of boast in it. Afterwards she kept her hands therefor a little while, and slowly took them away as if they were heavy.
"I am tired," said Miss Havisham. "I want diversion, and I have done with menand women. Play."
I think it will be conceded by my most disputatious reader, that she couldhardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything in the wide world moredifficult to be done under the circumstances.
"I sometimes have sick fancies," she went on, "and I have a sick fancy that Iwant to see some play. There, there!" with an impatient movement of the fingersof her right hand; "play, play, play!"
For a moment, with the fear of my sister's working me before my eyes, I had adesperate idea of starting round the room in the assumed character of Mr.Pumblechook's chaise-cart. But I felt myself so unequal to the performance thatI gave it up, and stood looking at Miss Havisham in what I suppose she took fora dogged manner, inasmuch as she said, when we had taken a good look at eachother,—
"Are you sullen and obstinate?"
"No, ma'am, I am very sorry for you, and very sorry I can't play just now. Ifyou complain of me I shall get into trouble with my sister, so I would do it ifI could; but it's so new here, and so strange, and so fine,—and melancholy—." Istopped, fearing I might say too much, or had already said it, and we tookanother look at each other.
Before she spoke again, she turned her eyes from me, and looked at the dressshe wore, and at the dressing-table, and finally at herself in thelooking-glass.
"So new to him," she muttered, "so old to me; so strange to him, so familiar tome; so melancholy to both of us! Call Estella."
As she was still looking at the reflection of herself, I thought she was stilltalking to herself, and kept quiet.
"Call Estella," she repeated, flashing a look at me. "You can do that. CallEstella. At the door."
To stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house, bawlingEstella to a scornful young lady neither visible nor responsive, and feeling ita dreadful liberty so to roar out her name, was almost as bad as playing toorder. But she answered at last, and her light came along the dark passage likea star.
Miss Havisham beckoned her to come close, and took up a jewel from the table,and tried its effect upon her fair young bosom and against her pretty brownhair. "Your own, one day, my dear, and you will use it well. Let me see youplay cards with this boy."
"With this boy? Why, he is a common labouring-boy!"
I thought I overheard Miss Havisham answer,—only it seemed so unlikely,—"Well?You can break his heart."
"What do you play, boy?" asked Estella of myself, with the greatest disdain.
"Nothing but beggar my neighbour, miss."
"Beggar him," said Miss Havisham to Estella. So we sat down to cards.
It was then I began to understand that everything in the room had stopped, likethe watch and the clock, a long time ago. I noticed that Miss Havisham put downthe jewel exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up. As Estella dealtthe cards, I glanced at the dressing-table again, and saw that the shoe uponit, once white, now yellow, had never been worn. I glanced down at the footfrom which the shoe was absent, and saw that the silk stocking on it, oncewhite, now yellow, had been trodden ragged. Without this arrest of everything,this standing still of all the pale decayed objects, not even the witheredbridal dress on the collapsed form could have looked so like grave-clothes, orthe long veil so like a shroud.
So she sat, corpse-like, as we played at cards; the frillings and trimmings onher bridal dress, looking like earthy paper. I knew nothing then of thediscoveries that are occasionally made of bodies buried in ancient times, whichfall to powder in the moment of being distinctly seen; but, I have oftenthought since, that she must have looked as if the admission of the naturallight of day would have struck her to dust.
"He calls the knaves Jacks, this boy!" said Estella with disdain, before ourfirst game was out. "And what coarse hands he has! And what thick boots!"
I had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before; but I began toconsider them a very indifferent pair. Her contempt for me was so strong, thatit became infectious, and I caught it.
She won the game, and I dealt. I misdealt, as was only natural, when I knew shewas lying in wait for me to do wrong; and she denounced me for a stupid, clumsylabouring-boy.
"You say nothing of her," remarked Miss Havisham to me, as she looked on. "Shesays many hard things of you, but you say nothing of her. What do you think ofher?"
"I don't like to say," I stammered.
"Tell me in my ear," said Miss Havisham, bending down.
"I think she is very proud," I replied, in a whisper.
"Anything else?"
"I think she is very pretty."
"Anything else?"
"I think she is very insulting." (She was looking at me then with a look ofsupreme aversion.)
"Anything else?"
"I think I should like to go home."
"And never see her again, though she is so pretty?"
"I am not sure that I shouldn't like to see her again, but I should like to gohome now."
"You shall go soon," said Miss Havisham, aloud. "Play the game out."
Saving for the one weird smile at first, I should have felt almost sure thatMiss Havisham's face could not smile. It had dropped into a watchful andbrooding expression,—most likely when all the things about her had becometransfixed,—and it looked as if nothing could ever lift it up again. Her chesthad dropped, so that she stooped; and her voice had dropped, so that she spokelow, and with a dead lull upon her; altogether, she had the appearance ofhaving dropped body and soul, within and without, under the weight of acrushing blow.
I played the game to an end with Estella, and she beggared me. She threw thecards down on the table when she had won them all, as if she despised them forhaving been won of me.
"When shall I have you here again?" said Miss Havisham. "Let me think."
I was beginning to remind her that to-day was Wednesday, when she checked mewith her former impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand.
"There, there! I know nothing of days of the week; I know nothing of weeks ofthe year. Come again after six days. You hear?"
"Yes, ma'am."
"Estella, take him down. Let him have something to eat, and let him roam andlook about him while he eats. Go, Pip."
I followed the candle down, as I had followed the candle up, and she stood itin the place where we had found it. Until she opened the side entrance, I hadfancied, without thinking about it, that it must necessarily be night-time. Therush of the daylight quite confounded me, and made me feel as if I had been inthe candlelight of the strange room many hours.
"You are to wait here, you boy," said Estella; and disappeared and closed thedoor.
I took the opportunity of being alone in the courtyard to look at my coarsehands and my common boots. My opinion of those accessories was not favourable.They had never troubled me before, but they troubled me now, as vulgarappendages. I determined to ask Joe why he had ever taught me to call thosepicture-cards Jacks, which ought to be called knaves. I wished Joe had beenrather more genteelly brought up, and then I should have been so too.
She came back, with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer. She put themug down on the stones of the yard, and gave me the bread and meat withoutlooking at me, as insolently as if I were a dog in disgrace. I was sohumiliated, hurt, spurned, offended, angry, sorry,—I cannot hit upon the rightname for the smart—God knows what its name was,—that tears started to my eyes.The moment they sprang there, the girl looked at me with a quick delight inhaving been the cause of them. This gave me power to keep them back and to lookat her: so, she gave a contemptuous toss—but with a sense, I thought, of havingmade too sure that I was so wounded—and left me.
But when she was gone, I looked about me for a place to hide my face in, andgot behind one of the gates in the brewery-lane, and leaned my sleeve againstthe wall there, and leaned my forehead on it and cried. As I cried, I kickedthe wall, and took a hard twist at my hair; so bitter were my feelings, and sosharp was the smart without a name, that needed counteraction.
My sister's bringing up had made me sensitive. In the little world in whichchildren have their existence whosoever brings them up, there is nothing sofinely perceived and so finely felt as injustice. It may be only smallinjustice that the child can be exposed to; but the child is small, and itsworld is small, and its rocking-horse stands as many hands high, according toscale, as a big-boned Irish hunter. Within myself, I had sustained, from mybabyhood, a perpetual conflict with injustice. I had known, from the time whenI could speak, that my sister, in her capricious and violent coercion, wasunjust to me. I had cherished a profound conviction that her bringing me up byhand gave her no right to bring me up by jerks. Through all my punishments,disgraces, fasts, and vigils, and other penitential performances, I had nursedthis assurance; and to my communing so much with it, in a solitary andunprotected way, I in great part refer the fact that I was morally timid andvery sensitive.
I got rid of my injured feelings for the time by kicking them into the brewerywall, and twisting them out of my hair, and then I smoothed my face with mysleeve, and came from behind the gate. The bread and meat were acceptable, andthe beer was warming and tingling, and I was soon in spirits to look about me.
To be sure, it was a deserted place, down to the pigeon-house in thebrewery-yard, which had been blown crooked on its pole by some high wind, andwould have made the pigeons think themselves at sea, if there had been anypigeons there to be rocked by it. But there were no pigeons in the dove-cot, nohorses in the stable, no pigs in the sty, no malt in the storehouse, no smellsof grains and beer in the copper or the vat. All the uses and scents of thebrewery might have evaporated with its last reek of smoke. In a by-yard, therewas a wilderness of empty casks, which had a certain sour remembrance of betterdays lingering about them; but it was too sour to be accepted as a sample ofthe beer that was gone,—and in this respect I remember those recluses as beinglike most others.
Behind the furthest end of the brewery, was a rank garden with an old wall; notso high but that I could struggle up and hold on long enough to look over it,and see that the rank garden was the garden of the house, and that it wasovergrown with tangled weeds, but that there was a track upon the green andyellow paths, as if some one sometimes walked there, and that Estella waswalking away from me even then. But she seemed to be everywhere. For when Iyielded to the temptation presented by the casks, and began to walk on them, Isaw her walking on them at the end of the yard of casks. She had herback towards me, and held her pretty brown hair spread out in her two hands,and never looked round, and passed out of my view directly. So, in the breweryitself,—by which I mean the large paved lofty place in which they used to makethe beer, and where the brewing utensils still were. When I first went into it,and, rather oppressed by its gloom, stood near the door looking about me, I sawher pass among the extinguished fires, and ascend some light iron stairs, andgo out by a gallery high overhead, as if she were going out into the sky.
It was in this place, and at this moment, that a strange thing happened to myfancy. I thought it a strange thing then, and I thought it a stranger thinglong afterwards. I turned my eyes—a little dimmed by looking up at the frostylight—towards a great wooden beam in a low nook of the building near me on myright hand, and I saw a figure hanging there by the neck. A figure all inyellow white, with but one shoe to the feet; and it hung so, that I could seethat the faded trimmings of the dress were like earthy paper, and that the facewas Miss Havisham's, with a movement going over the whole countenance as if shewere trying to call to me. In the terror of seeing the figure, and in theterror of being certain that it had not been there a moment before, I at firstran from it, and then ran towards it. And my terror was greatest of all when Ifound no figure there.
Nothing less than the frosty light of the cheerful sky, the sight of peoplepassing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate, and the reviving influence ofthe rest of the bread and meat and beer, would have brought me round. Even withthose aids, I might not have come to myself as soon as I did, but that I sawEstella approaching with the keys, to let me out. She would have some fairreason for looking down upon me, I thought, if she saw me frightened; and shewould have no fair reason.
She gave me a triumphant glance in passing me, as if she rejoiced that my handswere so coarse and my boots were so thick, and she opened the gate, and stoodholding it. I was passing out without looking at her, when she touched me witha taunting hand.
"Why don't you cry?"
"Because I don't want to."
"You do," said she. "You have been crying till you are half blind, and you arenear crying again now."
She laughed contemptuously, pushed me out, and locked the gate upon me. I wentstraight to Mr. Pumblechook's, and was immensely relieved to find him not athome. So, leaving word with the shopman on what day I was wanted at MissHavisham's again, I set off on the four-mile walk to our forge; pondering, as Iwent along, on all I had seen, and deeply revolving that I was a commonlabouring-boy; that my hands were coarse; that my boots were thick; that I hadfallen into a despicable habit of calling knaves Jacks; that I was much moreignorant than I had considered myself last night, and generally that I was in alow-lived bad way.
